[Amit Varma]: One thing I have learnt while doing this show is how constrained our vision can be.
[Amit Varma]: They say where you stand depends on where you sit.
[Amit Varma]: And we may need to watch out for that.
[Amit Varma]: We are products of our time and circumstance.
[Amit Varma]: So I may look around at the people around me, fall for selection bias, and think this
[Amit Varma]: is the world.
[Amit Varma]: Or I may look further and see a bit more.
[Amit Varma]: I may be informed by books or movies.
[Amit Varma]: But to truly get a picture of the world where everything is now interconnected, I need to
[Amit Varma]: travel not only through geography and look outside of my own setting, but also through
[Amit Varma]: time.
[Amit Varma]: The world as it is now has been shaped by everything that came before and everything
[Amit Varma]: that exists elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: Reality, in a sense, is everything everywhere all at once.
[Amit Varma]: So to understand the full sweep of any subject is impossible.
[Amit Varma]: Is the effort worth making?
[Amit Varma]: Yes, it is.
[Amit Varma]: We understand because some brave soul took one for the team and made the effort of gathering
[Amit Varma]: dots and joining them.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Alice Evans, who teaches at the King's College in London, is a faculty
[Amit Varma]: associate at the Centre for International Development at Harvard, and is writing a grand
[Amit Varma]: book called The Great Gender Divergence.
[Amit Varma]: She looks across time and space to examine, in her words, quote, the origins and evolution
[Amit Varma]: of patriarchy, the drivers of gender equality and regional variations, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: She tries to understand the local factors at play that are causing different parts of
[Amit Varma]: the world to move towards gender equality at a different pace, as well as a global current
[Amit Varma]: should affect us all.
[Amit Varma]: She takes an interdisciplinary approach, brings prisms from many fields, and is unafraid to
[Amit Varma]: question conventions, or indeed to question her own priors.
[Amit Varma]: Her podcast is called Rocking Our Priors.
[Amit Varma]: She also uses Twitter in interesting and bold ways.
[Amit Varma]: She not only writes about her work, but she also thinks aloud, asks questions, engages
[Amit Varma]: in dialogue.
[Amit Varma]: And this conversation that you will hear now is eye-opening on its own.
[Amit Varma]: But it's also, in my view, part of a longer conversation that she has had across various
[Amit Varma]: fora and part of a longer conversation that I have had across episodes with many experts
[Amit Varma]: on gender.
[Amit Varma]: I will link all those episodes in the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: That's why I get to learn so much over time by having conversations like this.
[Amit Varma]: Before we begin this one, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of Clear Writing,
[Amit Varma]: and online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction, a lovely and lively community at the end of
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs Rs. 10,000 plus GST, or about $150, and is a monthly thing.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiauncut.com slash clearwriting.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer doesn't require God-given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Alice, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you for having me.
[Guest]: This is a real joy.
[Guest]: I'm excited.
[Amit Varma]: You know, when I met you earlier, we were both at this conference in Udaipur.
[Amit Varma]: And the first thought that struck me, and I told you this, was that you are the most
[Amit Varma]: energetic person I have ever met.
[Amit Varma]: You were just bouncing off the walls.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm kind of the opposite.
[Amit Varma]: So I've often had this contrast with my guests, where, you know, the contrast, very often,
[Amit Varma]: the most common place for the contrast is that I tend to be pessimistic, and my guests
[Amit Varma]: tend to be optimistic, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But here, I think it's a high energy, low energy contrast, especially because I've just
[Amit Varma]: recovered from something which was just like COVID.
[Amit Varma]: But I kept testing negative, which was really irritating, because I mean, I didn't want
[Amit Varma]: it to be COVID.
[Amit Varma]: But what the hell was it, you really want to know.
[Amit Varma]: So the last few days, I've been feeling a little low on energy.
[Amit Varma]: But it's really great, I think, therefore, that I'm starting my series of recordings
[Amit Varma]: in Delhi with you.
[Amit Varma]: Because hopefully, you can inject some of your energy into me and we can everything
[Amit Varma]: can start off well that way.
[Amit Varma]: I want to start by asking about your enthusiasm for life, which is a sort of a separate thing
[Amit Varma]: from energy.
[Amit Varma]: But you are always rushing to talk to people find out new things, even when you post things
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter, you're asking for criticism, and you mean it, you know, what I've noticed
[Amit Varma]: about you is that, you know, earlier, before we started recording, you were saying you
[Amit Varma]: don't feel things like jealousy and all those petty things.
[Amit Varma]: But what I noticed is that there's an there's that absence of ego also, where you're perfectly
[Amit Varma]: happy for someone to tell you that you're wrong about something if they're doing it
[Amit Varma]: in good faith, and you go out of your way to kind of solicit that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me how you sort of came to this approach, like what were you as a kid, you know, when
[Amit Varma]: you were 11?
[Amit Varma]: Were you also like bouncing off walls?
[Amit Varma]: And you also mentioned you've never fallen sick in your life, you've traveled through
[Amit Varma]: India and never got the loosies.
[Amit Varma]: So so tell me a little bit about the young Alice and as you're growing up, and what made
[Amit Varma]: you you know, not become an Olympic athlete, but instead, come towards wherever you are.
[Guest]: Okay, I think that I'm jolly and upbeat, maybe for three reasons.
[Guest]: And let me summarize those before we go into my childhood.
[Guest]: One is age 17.
[Guest]: After a number of adversities, I mean, I taught myself how to become happy, I thought, I need
[Guest]: to identify and work out what makes me happy and to pursue it, regardless of what other
[Guest]: people say, because yes, there'll always be criticism, but I need to pursue what makes
[Guest]: me happy.
[Guest]: And then I also thought to myself, I need to celebrate every single victory, you know,
[Guest]: so often we're on this ladder, and we're always looking up, you know, we're climbing up the
[Guest]: mountain, and we're looking at how far we have to climb.
[Guest]: And what I need to do is celebrate every accomplishment.
[Guest]: So that's one aspect of teaching myself how to become happy.
[Guest]: And I always see the silver lining.
[Guest]: Now it just comes naturally.
[Guest]: A second aspect is that what enables me to be happy is that I've emancipated and liberated
[Guest]: myself from people who might try to confine me, from gatekeepers who would support a very
[Guest]: narrow objective.
[Guest]: Now I do what I love, and I pursue it, you know, I love my project.
[Guest]: I think the great gender divergence is the most fundamental fact about humanity that
[Guest]: we cannot answer.
[Guest]: And I've got this tremendous curiosity to find out the answer, and I jump out of bed
[Guest]: every day excited to know the answer.
[Guest]: And I will look through every single piece of evidence so I can work that out.
[Guest]: So that's the second part, this curiosity about the world.
[Guest]: And then I'd say the third part is some of the adversities that I have overcome.
[Guest]: And I can share these with you now.
[Guest]: Yeah?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So I was born to great economic privilege, right?
[Guest]: My parents, you know, were professionals.
[Guest]: We lived in a lovely house, big garden, went to a very nice school, very well educated.
[Guest]: But then age 10, my father decided he was bored of family life.
[Guest]: He went off on motorbikes, holidays, sailing, and he basically abandoned us.
[Guest]: We had no idea where he was for several years, really, we just had no clue.
[Guest]: But my mother, my mother persevered, she was a lawyer.
[Guest]: And one Christmas, he invited his entire family over.
[Guest]: We cooked, we cleaned, we waited on them hand and foot.
[Guest]: We disappeared after the Christmas, he came back, he issued divorce proceedings.
[Guest]: And I was delighted.
[Guest]: I mean, he was this hot tempered bully.
[Guest]: He was ex-army.
[Guest]: He would just, you know, shout and bully and scold.
[Guest]: He was a nasty man.
[Guest]: He was even fired from one of his jobs because he was too aggressive.
[Guest]: So when he announced these divorce proceedings, I thought this was the most fantastic thing
[Guest]: in the world.
[Guest]: And then there's a saying in Urdu, the major fights and struggles and problems in life
[Guest]: over wealth, women and property.
[Guest]: And that was certainly the issue for my father.
[Guest]: So when there were the court proceedings, my mother got a share of the house.
[Guest]: My father resented that.
[Guest]: He bitterly resented the amount of money she got over dividing the property.
[Guest]: And then he was fueled with venom.
[Guest]: He never gave any money in financial support to my mother.
[Guest]: And every time my brother went to visit my father, he would return that weekend with
[Guest]: this poisonous venom and hatred against my mother that my father had instilled.
[Guest]: And I didn't want anything to do with my father, to be honest.
[Guest]: And I distanced myself from him.
[Guest]: And every time we went to pick up my brother, my father would be abusive to my mother.
[Guest]: He would treat her with contempt.
[Guest]: He would not allow her in.
[Guest]: And yet my mother, she always wanted to be polite, to be, you know, to maintain the moral
[Guest]: high ground, you know, to whatever they say to us, we'll be polite and we'll be courteous.
[Guest]: And so she was saddled with two kids in this economically privileged environment.
[Guest]: I went to the same school as Shahrukh Khan's son.
[Unknown]: So a very nice school, very nice.
[Guest]: That's my India connection early on.
[Guest]: So we went to this very nice school and my mother was worried financially, but she worked
[Guest]: incredibly hard.
[Guest]: I didn't realize at the time, but her field is very male dominated, international financial
[Guest]: law.
[Guest]: She was an entrepreneur, incredibly successful, and she made sure we had absolutely everything.
[Guest]: So she worked very long hours.
[Guest]: She was economically independent.
[Guest]: She was focused on work.
[Guest]: And I think through that, I realized the importance of pursuing my studies.
[Guest]: You know, marriage would be weak insurance for me.
[Guest]: I was going to make sure I was totally fine.
[Guest]: And she and she, she was incredibly entrepreneurial.
[Guest]: She bought this ramshackle house in a nice environment.
[Guest]: She did it up.
[Guest]: She made it spectacular.
[Guest]: She made it magnificent.
[Guest]: We had absolutely everything we could ever want.
[Guest]: And so and I benefited from that great education, just as I'm sure Shahrukh Khan's son did.
[Guest]: And so I went to debate clubs.
[Guest]: I was, you know, discussing literature.
[Guest]: I was really interested in philosophy and history.
[Guest]: I was winning academic prizes.
[Guest]: I was successful at school.
[Guest]: I was chirpy at school.
[Guest]: I mean, you ask about my cheerfulness.
[Guest]: I was jolly and playful and, you know, was one of the popular kids.
[Guest]: I had the parties were at my house.
[Guest]: You know, I was fun and outgoing.
[Guest]: That said, my brother always wanted to see my father.
[Guest]: And he was sort of treated as the golden boy.
[Guest]: And I never did.
[Guest]: And yet I was always pushed to spend time with him.
[Guest]: You know, my mother wanted to make things normal for my brother, wanted to thought it
[Guest]: was thought that family mattered and we should spend time with our family.
[Guest]: And so like, for example, I was pushed to go on holidays with him.
[Guest]: And the following year, I would be so upset and cross about that because my father was
[Guest]: a bully and horrific that the next year I wasn't good.
[Guest]: But I was pushed, you know, for the sake of my brother, that my brother's welfare was
[Guest]: prioritised.
[Guest]: Anyway, so at school, I did well.
[Guest]: And then, but I was, you know, I was in a very, you know, to be critical of my childhood,
[Guest]: I was in a very elitist parochial environment, you know, I surrounded by a bunch of rich
[Guest]: other kids.
[Guest]: I had no clue about the rest of the world.
[Guest]: I was absolutely clueless, totally clueless.
[Guest]: But anyway, so another important stage of my life was that age 16, I never had any periods.
[Guest]: And so I went to the doctors to discuss this to understand what was going on.
[Guest]: And they didn't know.
[Guest]: They thought that everything externally was normal, but something wasn't happening.
[Guest]: So they thought, well, maybe she just hasn't fully developed.
[Guest]: Maybe she hasn't fully gone through puberty.
[Guest]: So they gave me more progesterone and estrogen, even though the levels were totally normal.
[Guest]: So they put me on the pill.
[Guest]: That didn't work.
[Guest]: So age 16, they doubled the dose, which I'm sure is a great thing to give a teenage girl.
[Guest]: And then that didn't work.
[Guest]: So they thought, well, let's bypass the digestive system.
[Guest]: They put me on the patch pill.
[Guest]: That didn't work.
[Guest]: So anyway, so then they did a number of ultrasounds and they discovered I had only one kidney,
[Guest]: only one ovary, no uterus, no vagina.
[Guest]: This is a syndrome called Rokitansky.
[Guest]: It affects one in 5,000 women.
[Guest]: And the nurse told me, OK, so this is what you need to do.
[Guest]: She highlighted, she showed me a series of plastic dilators.
[Guest]: One is the size of your little finger.
[Guest]: One is the size of a much larger.
[Guest]: That was interesting.
[Guest]: She just basically told, so I had what was like a cute, like a dimple.
[Guest]: My vagina was like a dimple and you're basically supposed to ram these plastic dilators inside
[Guest]: me to build my own vagina.
[Guest]: And I think because of my childhood, having seen my mother being very pragmatic, you know,
[Guest]: just dealing with things, getting the job done, you know, my mother never showed any
[Guest]: weakness about my father.
[Guest]: She never cried.
[Guest]: I never saw her express despair.
[Guest]: She's not a warm or she's not a warm or jolly person.
[Guest]: She's pragmatic.
[Guest]: And so I had that same approach when I discovered I had no vagina.
[Guest]: I like here is the medical solution.
[Guest]: This is what I need to do.
[Guest]: So, you know, I do this therapy every night.
[Guest]: It's incredibly painful, you know, tearing a hole in yourself.
[Guest]: And but I did it.
[Guest]: You know, I go to the three months later, I go to the nurse, she's like 2.2 centimetres.
[Guest]: Six months later, 4.4 centimetres.
[Guest]: Anyway, I did it.
[Guest]: I made my own vagina.
[Guest]: And then I went to some of the there was a use of the hospital where I was affiliated
[Guest]: with in London.
[Guest]: They organised an event for many women with the same condition.
[Guest]: And we don't know the cause of this condition.
[Guest]: So there were women in hijabs, women in hot pants, you know, all typically around like
[Guest]: 17, 18, recently diagnosed.
[Guest]: And I then realised that my response to this diagnosis was totally unusual.
[Guest]: I mean, the rest of the women were depressed, traumatised, anxious, upset.
[Guest]: You know, they felt like they weren't proper women.
[Guest]: They didn't, you know, even though my even though externally I'm totally normal, even
[Guest]: though my chromosomes totally normal for females, they felt they weren't proper women.
[Guest]: They were incredibly distressed.
[Guest]: And so what I did is I got up and I said, Hey, I'm Alice Evans, and I made my own vagina
[Guest]: and you can too.
[Guest]: And that's probably one of the my greatest, my greatest contributions to public welfare.
[Guest]: Because after that, women, you know, contacted me, and they said, you've changed how I see
[Guest]: myself, you know, for so long, and, you know, so long.
[Guest]: And this is a broader point that whenever there is a stigma, whenever there is a taboo,
[Guest]: people stay silent, and they stay ashamed, and they don't speak to people.
[Guest]: And that can create that cultivates a negative feedback loop.
[Guest]: Because people feel alone, they don't have the support, they feel bad in themselves.
[Guest]: And that's just a mental construction, a repeat of beliefs and behaviour.
[Guest]: So what I saw is me speaking out was a public good.
[Guest]: So when I was at school, I would tell anyone who was interested, Hey, I have no vagina,
[Guest]: but I made it.
[Guest]: Because I thought people should know because if I can reach just one person, because it's
[Guest]: not in 5000 women, it's not that rare, but it doesn't get discussed.
[Guest]: So I went on BBC News about that, etc, etc.
[Guest]: Around that same period, and this is just the week before I went to university, my father's
[Guest]: ex girlfriend contacted me.
[Guest]: And she said, How's your father?
[Guest]: And I said, I don't know.
[Guest]: She said, Well, how's his wife?
[Guest]: Well, I said, I don't know about that either.
[Guest]: So anyway, so she I asked my mother to drive me to the ex girlfriend's house.
[Guest]: I discovered that my father had taken a BMW tour to Morocco, met a young woman a little
[Guest]: bit older than me, from a poor part of Marrakesh living in a two room flat with her 10 brothers
[Guest]: or whatever.
[Guest]: And he converted to Islam, paid for her with sugar, chickens and olive oil.
[Guest]: And she was going to come to England.
[Guest]: The ex girlfriend also told me that while living with my father, my father had given
[Guest]: her a black eye and ruptured her kidneys.
[Guest]: Now, my father had never been physically violent to us.
[Guest]: But I believe this.
[Guest]: And I was given my father's history.
[Guest]: I didn't think that was crazy.
[Guest]: And my the ex girlfriend also told me that my father had stalked her.
[Guest]: So I believe this.
[Guest]: And I was really worried about this Moroccan woman, especially you know, she she didn't
[Guest]: really speak English.
[Guest]: But anyway, so they my Moroccan wife came over, subsequently met her, they had a child.
[Guest]: Anyway, so that that's one issue.
[Guest]: And then my father, but then oh, yes, so I'll give you a brief story about that.
[Guest]: So they had they might they moved to France because land is cheaper there, I'm part French.
[Guest]: Then they had a child together.
[Guest]: But they were so incompatible, they called the child separate names.
[Guest]: Then my father tells us, and I don't know if this is true, the Moroccan wife violently
[Guest]: attacked him.
[Guest]: He claims this is because she wanted a greater share of the divorce proceedings because she
[Guest]: was trying to trigger violence in him.
[Guest]: They had five custody battles because my father did not want to pay the maintenance to her.
[Guest]: He did not want her to get the money, five custody battles over this child.
[Guest]: And at one point, my father kidnapped the child.
[Guest]: So she is in England, she moved back to England because she thought French people are racist
[Guest]: and she wanted to live in England.
[Guest]: She was a forget somewhere in England.
[Guest]: Then the police knocked on the door of my mother's house at 2am and asked to search
[Guest]: the property just in case the child was there.
[Guest]: My father was apprehended at Portsmouth in England and my brother had to pay the bail
[Guest]: of £5,000.
[Guest]: Anyway, we can move on from that story.
[Guest]: So that's just one, that's just one, you know, adventure.
[Guest]: Shall I go on to the...
[Guest]: So, so, okay.
[Guest]: So are we happy to continue?
[Amit Varma]: Please continue Emma.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Guest]: So then at university...
[Guest]: Oh no, I want to tell you another story that I think is an important part of the process.
[Guest]: When I was 16, we went on holiday to South Africa, Mozambique, Lesotho and Swaziland.
[Guest]: And that was my first encounter with extreme poverty.
[Guest]: That was the first time that I'd seen slums and rural deprivation.
[Guest]: And I remember we stopped, we stopped the car at one point, and we got out and my brother
[Guest]: and I and these other kids we were with, and we played with some kids, we like just playing
[Guest]: football.
[Guest]: And that was the first time that I'd seen extreme deprivation.
[Guest]: And after that, I just cried.
[Guest]: Because I'd never...
[Guest]: And it really shocked me.
[Guest]: It really shocked me.
[Amit Varma]: And...
[Amit Varma]: What was extreme deprivation?
[Guest]: What did you see?
[Guest]: Like seeing slums, seeing sewage, seeing kids with living in ramshackle houses, you know,
[Guest]: just dilapidated houses, having very, very little, you know, we, we had, you know, we
[Guest]: had friendship, we had humanity, we had solid, you know, we played together just as kids
[Guest]: do.
[Guest]: But I just had never encountered that level of deprivation before.
[Guest]: And I cried, I really cried.
[Guest]: I just didn't know that kind of, that kind of deprivation existed at all.
[Guest]: So I think, I think that was, that was an important point.
[Guest]: So then I went to university and I studied philosophy.
[Guest]: And that was incredibly important to my mental development.
[Guest]: So I think philosophy, I studied, you know, free will.
[Guest]: And through studying that, I realized that free will is impossible because it's luck
[Guest]: what kind of personality we have, you know, whether you're the person who works hard,
[Guest]: that's luck.
[Guest]: Whether you're a person, if you're born in an environment in which hard work pays off,
[Guest]: I also came to question personal identity that I realized there is no constant thing.
[Guest]: That's just a mental construction.
[Guest]: I also became skeptical the external world existed.
[Guest]: You know, we studied the arguments about the brain and the vat.
[Guest]: And I realized that I could be a brain and a vat.
[Guest]: There's no evidence that these aren't just mental stimulations.
[Guest]: I studied meta ethics and the idea that we actually, that actually our claims about right
[Guest]: and wrong and good and bad are just social constructs.
[Guest]: There's nothing in the external world that is a moral fact.
[Guest]: This is something that we've made up to and that has enabled our societies to thrive.
[Guest]: I also studied philosophy and I, before I, before I became a nihilist, I was very interested
[Guest]: in utilitarianism and I found that very persuasive.
[Guest]: And when I became a utilitarian, I became a vegan and I gave away vast sums of money
[Guest]: because I was concerned, you know, extreme poverty, et cetera.
[Guest]: So what was also in pursuit, I became, you know, that philosophy, I was continually questioning
[Guest]: everything.
[Guest]: So it's that intense questioning, no, there were no sacred truths.
[Guest]: There was nothing that would be taken for given.
[Guest]: I would, from now on, I would be questioning absolutely everything.
[Guest]: I should say I started philosophy in school, but it was exaggerated at university.
[Guest]: And I was also madly in love with formal logic.
[Guest]: I would spend my evenings studying formal.
[Guest]: I found it, I found it thrilling.
[Guest]: I found logical propositions, just, just sledgehammer logic.
[Guest]: I loved it.
[Guest]: I mean, I should say, I did dabble in university life.
[Guest]: So my first week of university, they have this thing called Freshers Week where people
[Guest]: go, and I thought, right, I'm going to try this out.
[Guest]: I will go out every single night and party until 5.30am.
[Guest]: I will try the student experience, and this is my sort of empirical experiment.
[Guest]: At the end of the week, I reviewed it.
[Guest]: I decided it did not make me happy.
[Guest]: And I never went out in the entire university life, but yet, I just loved philosophy and
[Guest]: formal logic and, and this analytical rigor.
[Guest]: I enjoyed that.
[Guest]: I was also, I also did a couple of courses in the philosophy of sex, in feminist philosophy.
[Guest]: So yeah, that was all important for my mental development, analytical rigor, questioning
[Guest]: everything.
[Guest]: Also at university, I joined university debate clubs.
[Guest]: So I would train twice a week in debate.
[Guest]: Every weekend, we would go to debate tournaments, and I went to European debate championships,
[Guest]: world debate tournaments.
[Guest]: I became president of the debate society.
[Guest]: I did that for a year.
[Guest]: But then I decided that actually, debate was not good for my mental development because
[Guest]: it forces, the goal is to destroy the other person.
[Guest]: The goal is to demonstrate such oratory that you just destroy them, embarrass them so that
[Guest]: people think you're right.
[Guest]: It's not about working out the correct answer.
[Guest]: It's not about you and I learning from each other.
[Guest]: And just before this, you and I were discussing something controversial.
[Guest]: We had a nice discussion.
[Guest]: It wasn't about working out the truth.
[Guest]: It was just this artistry.
[Guest]: And so I decided that no, this wasn't what I wanted to pursue.
[Guest]: This wasn't good for me.
[Guest]: So I was going to move on from it.
[Guest]: But it did, that practice definitely strengthened my skills.
[Guest]: And this is one thing I've come to learn, that no one is born with any innate skills,
[Guest]: but we develop them through practice, through good guidance, and also social recognition
[Guest]: and reward.
[Guest]: You know, the more that those are appreciated.
[Guest]: So I was in an environment where I was praised and rewarded through doing well in debate.
[Guest]: So that was important.
[Guest]: I would say one more thing, what helped me become more confident, because I am confident,
[Guest]: is also working in different environments.
[Guest]: Like from age 15, I was a waitress, and that teaches you know how to get along with different
[Guest]: people.
[Guest]: So I was, you know, quite confident about that.
[Guest]: I also had a couple of characters in my own family, you know, I talked about my abusive
[Guest]: father.
[Guest]: There were other characters who gave me other sources of inspiration.
[Guest]: My uncle is an interesting character.
[Guest]: Age 30, so he was doing an office job, age 30, he decided that didn't make him happy.
[Guest]: What he really loved was skiing and hang gliding.
[Guest]: So he quit his job, he went off to be a ski rep, because that way he could do as much
[Guest]: skiing as possible.
[Guest]: He lived in a caravan in the summer doing hang gliding.
[Guest]: And I love that.
[Guest]: You know, this is someone who thinks, I'm happy if I'm skiing and hang gliding.
[Guest]: So whatever social convention, let me do that.
[Guest]: Age 45, he then realized he needed a pension.
[Guest]: So he started up a business and they did tremendously well.
[Guest]: He's fine.
[Guest]: Then we have my grandfather, who was this pioneering physicist.
[Guest]: He was at Cambridge, then developed radar during the Second World War.
[Guest]: My grandmother was a historian.
[Guest]: She is probably the one person in my family who showed warmth and care.
[Guest]: You know, you would enter a room and she would make you feel valued.
[Guest]: She would make you feel cherished.
[Guest]: And actually, when she died five years ago, I had a, this is, I'll be interested in your
[Guest]: thoughts on this.
[Guest]: So often at funerals, at least in England, people mourn the dead and mourn their departure
[Guest]: and that loss.
[Guest]: And they also say nice things about them after they've died.
[Guest]: And so people never get to hear those nice things.
[Guest]: But I took a different approach to my grandmother's death.
[Guest]: I thought, well, let me identify her virtues and let me try to inculcate them in myself
[Guest]: so the wonderful things that she did can live on through me.
[Guest]: And so I try in my interactions, albeit imperfectly, to make people feel valued.
[Guest]: Like one thing I like to do is give credible compliments.
[Guest]: So I like, I think so many people, they're trying their best, but might not feel appreciated
[Guest]: or recognized.
[Guest]: And I can give several, for example, earlier this year, I was in Morocco, where I was doing
[Guest]: research for my book.
[Guest]: And this wonderful family invited me for iftar, to break the Ramadan.
[Guest]: And the mother made the most glorious spread, you know, there were so many different dishes
[Guest]: and they were all delicious.
[Guest]: And I sat there with her family.
[Guest]: And I noticed that not one of the, not her husband or either of her sons said anything
[Guest]: nice.
[Guest]: They didn't say how delicious the food was.
[Guest]: They didn't praise it.
[Guest]: And that's common the world over, that women's care workers not recognized is not valued.
[Guest]: And I was, and I wanted to tell her how much I enjoyed the food and this is delicious.
[Guest]: And this is like, and not just to say it's delicious, but to explain why.
[Guest]: And afterwards, when we were washing up in the kitchen, I said to her, I noticed that
[Guest]: other people didn't comment on the food.
[Guest]: And she said, yeah, they treat me like a maid.
[Guest]: And I think that's not a uniquely gendered issue, but there are so many people, whatever
[Guest]: they do, they're trying, but people might not say what we appreciate and what we recognize.
[Guest]: And I like to, I like to compliment people.
[Unknown]: And I don't do it in an insincere, it's not just a fake claim, but I like to identify
[Guest]: and highlight and explain what I see in the other person that's brilliant and fascinating,
[Guest]: because everyone has these unique draws.
[Guest]: And that very much comes from my grandmother.
[Guest]: And so that's something that I try to inculcate.
[Guest]: And I want everyone to leave an interaction with me feeling better about themselves and
[Guest]: feeling happy about that interaction.
[Guest]: So that's important for me.
[Guest]: So even though I'm a nihilist, I do try to, you know, spread joy, in a sense, okay.
[Guest]: So, so, okay, so now we come to, okay, so let's say we've done the undergraduate degree
[Guest]: in philosophy, then I did a three month internship with an NGO working on poverty reduction,
[Guest]: because I'm now interested in that.
[Guest]: I initially wanted to be a human rights lawyer.
[Guest]: But through this experience, I realized, actually, I wanted to understand the causes of underdevelopment.
[Guest]: So I was going to the LSE, and I switched to master's to study international development.
[Guest]: They would allow me to come, but I had to wait a year.
[Guest]: In that intervening time, I had a year to kill, what was I going to do?
[Guest]: So in walks the country director of ActionAid, the Gambia, she walks in, and I introduce
[Guest]: myself to her, I say, Hi, I'm Alice Evans.
[Guest]: And I'd like to come and work for you.
[Guest]: And so off I go to the Gambia.
[Guest]: And that was that.
[Guest]: And while I go to the Gambia, I do a search of all the professors at the LSE.
[Guest]: Is there anyone who's studying the Gambia?
[Guest]: And I find a professor who is, I volunteer to be her research assistant, we do a research
[Guest]: project on gender, and I realized the importance of social esteem.
[Guest]: So I, so I even before my master's, I was doing this six month qualitative research
[Guest]: project, then I went to the LSE.
[Guest]: And I was so excited, I thought now I'm going to find some brilliant minds who will be able
[Guest]: to discuss these topics as we talked, you know, I'm very curious, I'm eager to discuss.
[Guest]: So I went in and I had read everything.
[Unknown]: You know, I had studied everything and I was eager to chat.
[Guest]: And I was so disappointed.
[Guest]: You know, people could regurgitate the two basic readings.
[Guest]: So that was disappointing.
[Guest]: You know, I think throughout my life, I've always wanted to find people who might want
[Guest]: to share and discuss these ideas.
[Guest]: But you know, that wasn't at the LSE.
[Guest]: Then, so then, after my master's, I decided I want to pursue a PhD now, because I was
[Guest]: and I chose to continue with Professor Sylvia Chant, because I knew her, we had a nice relationship.
[Guest]: So I was interested in gender, merely because of she was interested in gender, it wasn't
[Guest]: like I had this strong feminist zeal.
[Guest]: Many of the studies on gender at the time were often short term studies, you know, micro
[Guest]: finance, does it change gender relations in six months?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: So I thought, well, actually, you know, gender relations take a long time to change generations.
[Guest]: And so what we need to study is the lingerie.
[Guest]: So I thought, where is a good place for me to study 100 years of how gender relations
[Guest]: change?
[Guest]: And I picked Zambia, because from the 1930s, there have been ethnographic anthropological
[Guest]: studies.
[Guest]: So 1930s, 1950s, 1970s, so that was a great place for me to go to.
[Guest]: One hitch is that people will be speaking Bemba.
[Guest]: So obviously, I need to teach myself Bemba, how am I going to do this?
[Guest]: Well, I contacted a professor of languages at SOAS, who, but then we couldn't find a
[Guest]: deal, we really couldn't find many resources.
[Guest]: So I found on eBay, a colonial missionaries drama book.
[Guest]: And I also found a sort of dictionary from the 1960s.
[Guest]: And I studied this.
[Guest]: And then I went to Zambia, I just went to some event, I met a school girl, and I said
[Guest]: she was 16.
[Guest]: Her name's Esther.
[Guest]: And I said, Can I come and stay with you?
[Guest]: And she said, Yes.
[Guest]: So I lived with that family.
[Guest]: And every morning, I woke up at 4am, I studied my grammar book, I soon realized that the
[Guest]: dictionary I was using was totally antiquated.
[Guest]: I mean, these were like, deep rural Bemba that missionaries were using.
[Guest]: So no one was using these words.
[Guest]: So what I did is I wrote my own dictionary.
[Guest]: Every time I heard a word, I drew a picture of it, because that's a form of active learning
[Guest]: that the more we creatively engage with a concept, the more we it aids our learning.
[Guest]: So I wrote this dictionary, I wrote my own dictionary, I became fluent in Bemba, and
[Guest]: I also lived with I also, in that period, one day I was interviewed, I mean, it's this,
[Guest]: it's my intense curiosity that pushes me to take to pushes me to be bold and take risks,
[Guest]: because all I want to do is learn.
[Guest]: And so nothing else matters.
[Guest]: So I wanted to interview a local government counselor.
[Guest]: So I the day and she's living in a slum.
[Guest]: So the day I meet her, I say, you know, we have a nice chat, we have a fantastic interview,
[Guest]: we get along, I say, well, can I come and live with you?
[Guest]: So then after that, I lived in the slum for six months.
[Guest]: Another time, I went to interview an MP in the same area, and she invited me to stay
[Guest]: with her.
[Guest]: And then off I went to live with MPs and, and while I so in Zambia, all the MPs live
[Guest]: together in a sort of BNB type event type affair.
[Guest]: And so while I was staying there, I was invited to go on national TV and was interviewed about
[Guest]: my research in Bemba.
[Guest]: So I was on state TV.
[Guest]: And then here's this young white woman, I was what, 24 at the time, who's fluent in
[Guest]: Bemba.
[Guest]: And so I became famous across the country.
[Guest]: So I would, anywhere I would walk, I would get on a bus, I would get in a taxi, I would
[Guest]: be in a supermarket 200 miles away, and people would know who I was.
[Guest]: One time I was even deep, deep in the bush, and I was giving all my official papers to
[Guest]: this person, you know, showing I had approval.
[Unknown]: So she was like, I know who you are, I've seen you on TV.
[Unknown]: So that was all very helpful that people felt that they knew me.
[Guest]: That study, so that study in Zambia, was really important.
[Guest]: So what I learned is, in Zambia, there's now a saying you can hear in markets, in schools,
[Guest]: in homes, they say, banamayo, kutibaa bomba inshitao shaabaomei.
[Guest]: And what that means is, women can do what men can do.
[Guest]: And this has emerged as a result of economic behaviour and cultural changes in that from
[Guest]: the 1980s, there was worsening economic insecurity as a result of the plummeting price of copper,
[Guest]: state cutbacks, HIV AIDS, and men could no longer provide for their families single handedly.
[Guest]: And so women surged into the labour force to provide for their children, to make ends
[Guest]: meet.
[Guest]: And initially, this was just adding to their drudgery, you know, they weren't being recognised,
[Guest]: they weren't being valued.
[Guest]: But through prolonged exposure, as people saw women fighting to provide for their children,
[Guest]: to pay the electricity, as widows were demonstrating equal competence alongside men, then people
[Guest]: and through public discussions, you know, people discussing, talking in the marketplaces,
[Guest]: sharing stories about these women pioneers, sharing stories about women mechanics, women
[Guest]: professors, women doing all these great things, people came to recognise and revere women
[Guest]: and that encouraged social change.
[Guest]: So that was my PhD, broadly.
[Guest]: And then I realised another conundrum, well, why is this social change being faster in
[Guest]: cities than in rural areas?
[Guest]: And that's a global phenomenon, that in cities, people are generally much more liberal, much
[Guest]: more gender equal, etc.
[Guest]: So I thought, right, I want to test, I want to understand this.
[Guest]: So let me do a comparative rural urban ethnography.
[Guest]: So I returned to Zambia, I interviewed some rural urban traders, and they invite me to
[Guest]: go back to their village.
[Guest]: So we were talking about and so to get there, I was going to board a coach, take a shortcut
[Guest]: through the Democratic Republic of Congo.
[Guest]: And on the way, these Congolese border officials stop me and tell me to disembark the coach.
[Guest]: These eight soldiers take me into a room, and they shout at me in the local language.
[Guest]: And you can understand this, you know, they haven't been paid in a long time, they want
[Guest]: to intimidate the white person.
[Guest]: I totally understand that.
[Guest]: As luck would have it, colonial borders were arbitrarily imposed.
[Guest]: I already knew their language.
[Guest]: So I reply in my polite and fluent Bemba, and I explain myself, I explain my purpose,
[Guest]: I'm perfectly calm.
[Guest]: This frustrated them.
[Guest]: So they took me to another room, where they shouted and texted me in French.
[Guest]: As luck would have it, I'm part French.
[Guest]: So they eventually released me, off I go, back on the coach, through this 10 hour drive
[Guest]: through the muddy parts of Congo, I arrive in the village.
[Guest]: And that was wonderful.
[Guest]: This is a place of no electricity, no running water, no phone signal.
[Guest]: But you know, I talked to people, I tried to understand why many of these traditions
[Guest]: had persisted in the village.
[Guest]: And I learned that, you know, this is a place that's, this was a swamp.
[Guest]: So it's much more socially isolated, many of the, the vast majority of the women there
[Guest]: were wives and mothers.
[Guest]: And that's, you know, people grew up anticipating that.
[Guest]: So even if, even if, and also there's this, and I realized how negative feedback loops
[Guest]: can persist.
[Guest]: So even because of fear of social condemnation.
[Guest]: So for example, one woman, Mavis, she was a trader in town.
[Guest]: And through trading in town, she heard that in town, women kept their own money.
[Guest]: And she wanted that.
[Guest]: She definitely wanted that.
[Guest]: But she couldn't push for that at home.
[Guest]: And that frustrated her.
[Guest]: And I asked her why is because people in her community wouldn't support that.
[Guest]: And she didn't want to fight that battle.
[Guest]: And similarly, I was talking to a man in town who, through coming to town, he realized that
[Guest]: gender based violence was wrong, that was wrong to be your wife, he was definitely opposed
[Guest]: to it.
[Guest]: But back in the village, he would not intervene in such cases, because he anticipated social
[Guest]: condemnation.
[Guest]: And I think that's an important point about what I call our norm perception.
[Guest]: So even if we are privately critical of something, if we anticipate social disapproval, we often
[Guest]: choose not to rock the boat.
[Guest]: And that can create what I call a despondency trap.
[Guest]: Because if we never see successful resistance, people may not push back.
[Guest]: And so then they never see successful resistance.
[Guest]: And so these places remain caught in a negative feedback loop, and that impedes social change.
[Guest]: So it's the isolation, the death of economic opportunities, leads to cultural persistence.
[Guest]: So that rural study was that's really important.
[Guest]: And then I had another conundrum.
[Guest]: Well, I wanted to test my hypothesis, because what I'm ultimately saying is that it's cities
[Guest]: catalyzing social change, it's the diversity, the heterogeneity of people, or it's you know,
[Guest]: that myriad exposure, you know, in a Zambian copper belt, you're bored of bus, and you'll
[Guest]: see a woman going off to her office, you'll see a woman driving a truck to the mind, it's
[Guest]: all those myriad exposures, those associations, seeing the different different things going
[Guest]: on talking about them debating things.
[Guest]: Just yesterday, I was at JNU chatting with female students about their same experience
[Guest]: that they're sharing ideas.
[Guest]: And I was thinking that cities themselves are catalysts of social change.
[Guest]: But maybe I got it wrong.
[Guest]: Maybe it was just about women having economic opportunities.
[Guest]: So I thought, well, let me test this hypothesis.
[Guest]: What I need to do is look for a rural labor demand shock, I need to find a village where
[Guest]: there's suddenly been female employment does, you know, in a rural environment with this
[Guest]: isolated that doesn't have those diverse experiences and exposure, could female employment catalyze
[Guest]: a change of its own accord.
[Guest]: So I think where in the world is a rural labor demand shock, I know, Cambodia, because of
[Guest]: rising labor costs and land costs in China, many factories have relocated to rural Cambodia.
[Guest]: So off I go to Cambodia, and I start learning Khmer, I contact a family and I do rural urban
[Guest]: comparative ethnographic research in Cambodia.
[Guest]: And that was enormously fascinating.
[Guest]: So every morning at 5.30am, I'm chatting with the factory workers.
[Guest]: And through this, again, you know, the rural factory workers were saying how, you know,
[Guest]: they feel pride that they're able to support their families, just like sons, they feel
[Guest]: pride that they're able to support their parents, but it's not like they have their own, you
[Guest]: know, incredible autonomy, they're not like they're challenging gender barriers, you know,
[Guest]: it's that they're gaining status, they're gaining pride, they're gaining esteem, but
[Guest]: it's far more, there's far more radical disruption in cities, you know, I talked to garment workers,
[Guest]: and they said, and one told me how, in the apartment next to her, the husband was sharing
[Guest]: the care work.
[Guest]: And she realized that, hey, hey, yeah, you know, if I'm working, my husband's working,
[Guest]: my husband could also be doing the washing up.
[Guest]: So she pushed for that, too.
[Guest]: Her husband refused.
[Guest]: And so she divorced him.
[Guest]: And I talked to students, too, and they saw, and they said, well, you know, the other day,
[Guest]: I saw a woman driving a tuk tuk, which is their equivalent of an auto rickshaw.
[Guest]: And they were like, women can do what men can do.
[Guest]: And I talked to male students, and they'd say, yeah, I came from the village, getting
[Guest]: a scholarship or bursary, you know, subsidies for education.
[Guest]: And I saw these women administrators, I saw these women managers, and I realized that
[Guest]: women can do stuff, too.
[Guest]: So again, I see the same theme, that cities enable this diversity, this exposure, these
[Guest]: critical discussions.
[Guest]: So that helped me realize something about the broader process of structural transformation,
[Guest]: that cities, combined with relatively high rates of female employment and public spaces
[Guest]: of open discussion, can enable cultural change.
[Guest]: But in this process, so what I've told you, it's basically like Alice having a dialogue
[Guest]: with Alice, right?
[Guest]: All these things have been like me testing my own hypotheses.
[Guest]: There's very little engagement with the outside world.
[Guest]: I mean, all these articles that I publish, they always publish well.
[Guest]: I never felt that there was a strong appetite or interest in my research.
[Guest]: Whenever I went to conferences, people were doing radically different things, you know,
[Guest]: there might be an RCT or there might be something.
[Guest]: I never found there was an audience that was interested in what I was doing.
[Guest]: It was just me by myself, interested in it, interested in it for my own sake.
[Guest]: And I think there, Twitter in part has helped me because I'm able to reach out to a broader
[Guest]: audience.
[Guest]: I do find some people who are interested in these bigger questions.
[Guest]: And so I think that has been liberating in itself.
[Guest]: But I think also, so often you hear academics complain that there are disciplinary gatekeepers.
[Guest]: And you know, in economics, for example, they might say, you know, journals want to publish
[Guest]: these kinds of research or this is popular.
[Guest]: And I think of that as a little bit like an abusive marriage, that if people try to please
[Guest]: one person, then they're beholden to that narrow gatekeeper, whether it's journal gatekeepers
[Guest]: or whether it's the abusive husband.
[Guest]: But that's contingent on your desire to please that one narrow group.
[Guest]: We can, we each have the opportunity to step back and liberate ourselves and say, actually,
[Guest]: no, I don't want to.
[Guest]: That isn't the audience that I want to please.
[Guest]: So my PhD happened to be in geography because I'd followed Sylvia Chant.
[Guest]: I didn't like what the geography journals were pushing me to do.
[Guest]: They let me to theorise space.
[Guest]: I thought that was pointless.
[Guest]: So I stopped publishing geography.
[Guest]: So I think I've always had this, I've cultivated over time, incrementally, this sense of what
[Guest]: makes me happy?
[Guest]: What do I think is important intrinsically?
[Guest]: Let me pursue that.
[Guest]: I'm not going to be beholden to whatever kind of social policing or social convention.
[Guest]: I'm going to do what I think is important.
[Guest]: So I think that's a consequence of, you know, gaining knowledge.
[Guest]: But I think then another, in terms of continuing this theme about my research, 2019 was a major
[Guest]: step change because that's when I really engaged deeply with a debate around what's called
[Guest]: the Great Divergence.
[Guest]: So this is the rise of the West, the economic divergence in how some nations became rich
[Guest]: and democratic and others didn't.
[Guest]: And I found this fascinating.
[Guest]: I like these big comparative questions.
[Guest]: I was totally engrossed.
[Guest]: And through maybe three months of reading this literature, reading absolutely everything,
[Guest]: I was struck by something.
[Guest]: I realised there was also what I call the Great Gender Divergence in that all countries
[Guest]: are patriarchal, but we also see, if we look at objective, nationally representative indicators,
[Guest]: that in the Middle East, North Africa and South Asia, it is men who grow out of their
[Guest]: homes primarily to run family businesses, organise politically and make the laws of
[Guest]: the land.
[Guest]: In post-communist countries, Russia and China, women do work, but they're excluded from politics.
[Guest]: Russian government and Chinese politics are almost exclusively male, whereas in Latin
[Guest]: America, there's been this radical feminist transformation, soaring rates of female employment,
[Guest]: massive feminist rallies against gender-based violence, 11 legislatures now have gender
[Guest]: parity.
[Guest]: So it's converging with Europe, even though it was much more patriarchal.
[Guest]: And now today, Scandinavia is one of the most gender equal places in the world.
[Guest]: But for much of human history, it was far more patriarchal than bilateral and matrilineal
[Guest]: Southeast Asia, the Andes, the Gulf of Guinea and Southern Africa.
[Guest]: And so this, this is what I call the great gender divergence, this cultural heterogeneity
[Guest]: across the world, notwithstanding, you know, and so and so I started to study why exactly
[Guest]: that had happened.
[Guest]: And so broadly, my argument is that the great gender divergence occurred primarily in the
[Guest]: 20th century as a result of the enormous economic and political divergence, because with technology
[Guest]: and technological change and job creating economic growth, women seize those economic
[Guest]: opportunities.
[Guest]: We see soaring rates of female employment and advancement in both Europe, North America,
[Guest]: and also East Asia.
[Guest]: And by going out to factories, to jobs, women form friendships, and they start to challenge
[Guest]: and criticise many of these patriarchal ideas and traditions, they develop a politics of
[Guest]: solidarity.
[Guest]: And these female friendships are the, the foundations of feminist activism, and women
[Guest]: also seize political opportunities, so where there's democratisation, in South Korea, for
[Guest]: example, women organise for Me Too, they organise in Latin America, they challenge these, their
[Guest]: stigma and shame around rape.
[Guest]: But the rate at which women seize those political economic opportunities is mediated by their
[Guest]: culture.
[Guest]: And so then I wanted to understand the enormous divergence and causes of why in some cultures,
[Guest]: male labour supply rises weakly with economic jobs and opportunities, and so I can talk
[Guest]: about that if you'd like.
[Guest]: And so then I decided, I wrote to Princeton, and I had this big book proposal.
[Guest]: And I said, listen, here is the most fundamental fact about humanity that we cannot answer.
[Guest]: I want to study it.
[Guest]: This is what I propose.
[Guest]: I propose to study a history of every single country in the world.
[Guest]: This has not been done before, but I believe I can do it.
[Guest]: And at that time, you know, people did not believe that was possible.
[Guest]: But you know, I'm someone who's made my own vagina, who's taught myself to become fluent
[Guest]: in Bemba, and I pretty much believe I can do anything I want to, anything I put my mind
[Guest]: to.
[Guest]: I have learnt that with practice and perseverance, I can do it.
[Guest]: And I thought this was an important project, and I wanted to give it a try.
[Guest]: And so that's what I've been doing for almost three years now.
[Guest]: And so I've come to India as part of that study to, you know, try to learn, to listen
[Guest]: to different people traveling across India.
[Guest]: You know, so while I've, you know, read much of the literature and understanding, you know,
[Guest]: different academic perspectives, now I want to talk to people to hear their stories.
[Guest]: So let me come back to your question, what makes me, what makes me so upbeat and optimistic?
[Guest]: I think it's, I have pursued what's made me happy.
[Guest]: I have liberated myself from forces and organizations that would try to restrict me, constrain me.
[Guest]: I do what I enjoy, but I'm also enabled by incredible generosity, incredible kindness.
[Guest]: Like I was saying earlier, when I was stuck in Jaipur, the father offered to, you know,
[Guest]: drive me all the way.
[Guest]: When I was stuck in Jaipur, the guy offered to drive me all the way to Udaipur.
[Guest]: So it's people's support and kindness and encouragement, you know, I am not, I do not
[Guest]: exist in a vacuum, all of this.
[Guest]: And going back to Twitter, you know, I have received incredible support, encouragement,
[Guest]: and that social reward, that social recognition has really helped me continue.
[Guest]: You know, it's a lot of encouragement, a lot of support.
[Guest]: So I'm happy in that respect.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: There's so much to double click on, but I'm just wondering if this gentleman in Jaipur
[Amit Varma]: who offered to drive you, you should have told him, yeah, okay, drive me, he'd probably
[Amit Varma]: have driven you to the bus stop and said, there's a bus, take that bus.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm kidding.
[Amit Varma]: Lots to double click on here.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll, you know, before we get to your work and the great gender divergence and all
[Amit Varma]: of that, which we'll come to, before we get to that, you know, some more questions about
[Amit Varma]: your personal journey.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that I'm sort of struck by is how you bookended your wonderful answer
[Amit Varma]: by talking about happiness.
[Amit Varma]: And the sort of notion that you looked at it in an intentional way, you started by saying,
[Amit Varma]: I decided to be happy, right?
[Amit Varma]: As an act of intentionality.
[Amit Varma]: Later on, when you speak about college, you spoke about how you realized that any skill
[Amit Varma]: can be learned.
[Amit Varma]: So you could almost shape yourself by learning the stuff that you were learning, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and then you go to Zambia, and you learn Bemba, though, I have to tell you that if I try to
[Amit Varma]: teach myself a language by drawing something for every word, I would just be babbling,
[Amit Varma]: because I'm really bad at drawing.
[Amit Varma]: So I guess you're good at drawing as well, which is, again, in the time that you learn
[Amit Varma]: philosophy, one of the and I'll ask you about each of them, I won't ask you about freewill,
[Amit Varma]: I'll ask you about metaethics.
[Amit Varma]: But one thing that you mentioned was how you sort of realized that identity isn't a fixed
[Amit Varma]: thing, who you are isn't a fixed thing, you know, which is a theme I keep going back to
[Amit Varma]: on how it's contingent, not just on perhaps on circumstance, but also on little things
[Amit Varma]: like the chemical composition of your brain, or what did you have to eat that particular
[Amit Varma]: morning, if something is off a little bit, you're a different person entirely.
[Amit Varma]: And that speaks to also this effort you're talking about, of sort of building yourself
[Amit Varma]: deciding to be happy, deciding to be good at x, deciding to be good at y, deciding to
[Amit Varma]: follow all of these different things.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that, because sometimes when you know, I think in my, you
[Amit Varma]: know, extremely negative, pessimistic way about identity, and so on, I sometimes wonder
[Amit Varma]: if somebody says something good about me, that, you know, that does this person know
[Amit Varma]: that I'm really winging it, that all this isn't real.
[Amit Varma]: And then of course, the question at the back of that is that what is real?
[Amit Varma]: If everything is kind of constructed, either consciously or otherwise, by you, and most
[Amit Varma]: people, they are who they are kind of by default, they don't think too hard about this stuff.
[Amit Varma]: They think happiness is something that happens, not something that you can cause yourself
[Amit Varma]: to be right.
[Amit Varma]: So what are sort of your thoughts on becoming who you are, you know, especially when you
[Amit Varma]: realize through your study of philosophy that it's all fragile, you know, that you could
[Amit Varma]: just grow older and get dementia and forget everything.
[Amit Varma]: And if you forget everything, who are you, you know, you're back to nothing, except you
[Amit Varma]: no longer have the tools to build it back.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your sense of how your identity evolved when you look back at yourself?
[Amit Varma]: What do you like?
[Amit Varma]: What do you not like?
[Amit Varma]: When you think of who you are, you know, sort of what are your feelings?
[Amit Varma]: What did you want to be?
[Amit Varma]: How did you see that, you know, perception of yourself sort of changing with time?
[Guest]: I liked your question, what did I not like about my past?
[Guest]: You know, what aspects of Alice Evans were less good in the past?
[Unknown]: I think perhaps in the past, I might have allowed myself to be shy, to be nervous, to
[Guest]: be easily intimidated.
[Guest]: And I've overcome that in the way through encouragement from others.
[Guest]: So I remember after my PhD and postdoc at the LSE, I went to Cambridge, and I was very
[Guest]: nervous.
[Guest]: I was very intimidated.
[Guest]: But I had a wonderful colleague, Emma Maudsley, and she said, listen, there's just this Cambridge
[Guest]: myth.
[Guest]: These are just normal people, don't be intimidated.
[Guest]: And that support and encouragement made me feel okay.
[Guest]: And so I could engage with them.
[Guest]: So that I mean, you know, right now, I may strike you as this confident, bubbly person.
[Guest]: But this has been an incremental journey.
[Guest]: It's about trying something, taking a risk, being supported by others and realising I
[Guest]: can do it and then thriving.
[Guest]: So I think, you know, that so I was not always this confident.
[Guest]: I mean, there was a period when I think I was about 13.
[Guest]: And this was a result of my father's bullying, that I barely spoke, all I did really was
[Guest]: just apologise.
[Guest]: I just say, I'm sorry.
[Guest]: You know, that's what happens when you live with a bully, right?
[Guest]: So it's not like I've always been this, you know, go get in feisty, independent mind.
[Guest]: I mean, let me give you another example.
[Guest]: So I run my own podcast.
[Guest]: Not as successful as yours, but I started it when I was in Cambridge, because even then
[Guest]: I was relatively confident, but I knew that there were a number of other amazingly brilliant
[Guest]: minds who might be shyer and more worried about self promotion, they, you know, reluctant
[Guest]: to put themselves out there.
[Guest]: And I thought that's a net loss for the world, because we're not hearing their brilliant
[Guest]: ideas.
[Guest]: So let me set up a podcast and let me interview them.
[Guest]: So I was doing all these interviews with academics, and I wanted to highlight their research.
[Guest]: And this is also part of my, my love and excitement for learning.
[Guest]: So the other day, I did a very nice, I met at their conference in Udaipur, I met Soumya
[Guest]: Dhanaraja and Vidya Mahambre.
[Guest]: They told me about this research they just done.
[Guest]: And so they that very day, I say, hey, let's do a podcast.
[Guest]: This is great.
[Guest]: And they were a little bit nervous.
[Guest]: You know, they were worried.
[Guest]: They hadn't done a podcast before.
[Guest]: But I was encouraged.
[Guest]: I said, listen, your work is fascinating.
[Guest]: I want people to hear about this.
[Guest]: And so that's why I started the podcast to share brilliant ideas.
[Guest]: But even when I was doing that podcast, I was often deferential to my guests.
[Guest]: I was, even if I was privately critical, I was reluctant to say, I don't think that's
[Guest]: possible.
[Guest]: I don't think that's persuasive.
[Guest]: I didn't want to embarrass them in that spot.
[Guest]: I didn't want to be too aggressive.
[Guest]: I've always been, and this is possibly a consequence of my father, I've been incredibly uncomfortable
[Guest]: with conflict.
[Guest]: I don't like personal conflict.
[Guest]: It makes me tense up.
[Guest]: If someone is abusive or horrible to me, I'm just silent.
[Guest]: I'm silent.
[Guest]: I don't say anything.
[Guest]: I don't speak back.
[Guest]: And in my podcast previously, in my earlier episodes of my podcast, I did not challenge
[Guest]: my guests because I didn't want to be too conflictual, I was worried they wouldn't like
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And actually some male guests did react, sorry, yeah.
[Guest]: And so then a kind friend said to me, listen, I was listening to your podcast and I think
[Guest]: sometimes you disagree with them, but you don't say it.
[Guest]: And I think that's common for many people, especially women that we're reluctant to challenge.
[Guest]: And they said to me and they were really encouraging and supportive and they were like, listen,
[Guest]: you've read this material, you know your stuff, you can express yourself and push them.
[Guest]: And people enjoy that, people like a feisty podcast.
[Guest]: And I did that increasingly and I think, but it really depends on the guest.
[Guest]: So for example, one of my great, one of my very close, my best friends, he's very kind
[Guest]: and he's very supportive and whatever I say to him, he never is aggressive or hostile,
[Guest]: but other male guests have been.
[Guest]: So I once interviewed a professor who I won't name, but, and I challenged him on this podcast
[Guest]: and afterwards he sent me this hostile email.
[Guest]: He did not like that, he was like, well, I didn't know about your views and I, why were
[Guest]: you taking me to task?
[Guest]: And I was like, well, you could have read about my research.
[Guest]: Anyway, he was upset and there was a backlash about me challenging him, but anyway.
[Guest]: So my point is, my rambling point is that I was initially, even despite all those debate
[Guest]: clubs, despite all that independent travel, I was previously much more cautious, much
[Guest]: shyer, much less reluctant, more reluctant to rock the boat and challenge things, more,
[Guest]: you know, quieter.
[Guest]: But it's something that I've learned that many people may try to, you know, assert themselves.
[Guest]: And part of, you know, developing an open dialogue and a more egalitarian relationship
[Guest]: is to assert oneself.
[Guest]: And so I can draw a brilliant example from the Gulf of Guinea.
[Guest]: So in the Gulf of Guinea, there was, there were women always had in Yoruba and Igbo,
[Guest]: Asante and in Cameroon as well, women had their own independent networks and they use
[Guest]: that female solidarity to challenge men that would try to transgress or try to challenge
[Guest]: their autonomy and authority.
[Guest]: In Cameroon, they would even say, you know, a man dare not even steal an egg from his
[Guest]: wife's chicken coop because these women, you know, gender relations aren't set in stone.
[Guest]: It depends on women mobilizing, protecting their entitlements.
[Guest]: And that's, and that is something that I've learned to do.
[Guest]: It's a skill I've developed.
[Unknown]: Yes.
[Guest]: So that's a, so, so to answer your question, what do I not like about the old Alice Evans
[Guest]: is that not so much to dislike, but I've learned how to be more confident and more assertive
[Guest]: in myself.
[Guest]: And I've learned also to be more diplomatic and to learn the ways in which it's possible.
[Guest]: And I've learned how to get along or cultivate, you know, get along with a diverse group of
[Guest]: people.
[Guest]: And that's come through, you know, traveling the world, meeting lots of different people.
[Unknown]: So I've learned diplomacy and I've learned assertion, I'd say.
[Amit Varma]: Early on, you know, in your first answer, you spoke about how, when your dad filed for
[Amit Varma]: divorce, you was just so delighted that this shit is over.
[Amit Varma]: Later, you spoke about Cambodia and about how these women would go to factories and
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, they'd be, you know, staying, staying with next to other women like them.
[Amit Varma]: And they'd hear another woman say that, oh, my husband shares his housework.
[Amit Varma]: Then you spoke about this young lady who demanded the same of her husband and divorced him,
[Amit Varma]: you know, which is again, a cause for celebration.
[Amit Varma]: I once I think 13 years ago, I wrote a column about how the best metric we can use in India
[Amit Varma]: to show whether women are progressing or not is rising divorce rates, which I felt was
[Amit Varma]: great.
[Amit Varma]: The higher they go, the better they are, because it shows that women are getting more empowered.
[Amit Varma]: But a larger question I have for you, and we'll, of course, talk about all your research
[Amit Varma]: and all your work in detail, but the larger question that I have is that isn't marriage
[Amit Varma]: toxic?
[Amit Varma]: Isn't marriage fundamentally toxic, especially for women?
[Amit Varma]: It's convenient for men.
[Amit Varma]: But isn't it toxic?
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, when you look at the larger arc of history, like what you've done so beautifully
[Amit Varma]: through all your writings and your essays, is talk about how all our norms, all the ways
[Amit Varma]: that we behave, the structures in society are shaped by things like geography and economics
[Amit Varma]: and different kinds of circumstance.
[Amit Varma]: And so the change that we see through the decades and centuries seems agonizingly slow,
[Amit Varma]: extremely incremental.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm going to ask you to take a leap now, and imagine maybe two 300 years later.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that marriage in many ways, especially in the ways that we think of it
[Amit Varma]: is already redundant.
[Amit Varma]: And there is an acceptance of it, which is a lagging acceptance, and it'll take a long
[Amit Varma]: time to play out, but it simply doesn't make sense, especially for women, especially in
[Guest]: the shape that it is now.
[Guest]: Okay, let me answer that with three points.
[Guest]: Point number one.
[Guest]: No, I do not believe that marriage is toxic.
[Guest]: I've met many people in wonderfully happy, supportive, loving relationships, you know,
[Guest]: the experience of love, it can be found.
[Amit Varma]: I don't mean every marriage is toxic.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the notion, the concept of marriage, the way people look at it, both men and women.
[Guest]: I think marriage can cultivate hierarchies and inequalities if several conditions are
[Guest]: met.
[Guest]: One is if, one, the cultural valorization of marriage as the most important end point
[Guest]: for a woman means that women can be constantly striving and desperate for that marriage.
[Guest]: So, Shrayana has a wonderful book, Desperately Seeking Shahrukh.
[Guest]: And she highlights how, and also there's a fantastic book on India called Chup, when
[Guest]: it's about, you know, women being socialized for marriage and believing that, you know,
[Guest]: going to marriage is the most important thing.
[Guest]: And if women who fail to achieve that are somehow defunct and flawed, and that can
[Guest]: trigger, you know, that social policing means that women might, you know, opt for the wrong,
[Guest]: for someone who doesn't make them happy and remain in an abusive relationship.
[Guest]: So it's one, the cultural valorization of marriage.
[Guest]: Two, it's the dearth of economic opportunities that might make women reluctant to leave that
[Guest]: abusive marriage.
[Guest]: And three, if divorce rates are very low, then we're, and if there's strong social policing,
[Guest]: women may believe that they can't exist alone.
[Guest]: So for, and we see this across, so there's this, Bijou has a great paper on terrorism
[Guest]: and dowry deaths and his argument, as I recall, it's from Karnataka, he talks about women
[Guest]: being reluctant, women getting married, then their husband's family exploiting her and
[Guest]: beating her up to leverage more dowry and her not leaving because of fear of social
[Guest]: policing, the failure, you know, the condemnation of a divorced woman.
[Guest]: So it's the condemnation of divorce and the dearth of economic options, and also women's
[Guest]: fear that they cannot manage alone means that women continue in many of those abusive, unhappy
[Guest]: relationships.
[Guest]: So those conditions can cultivate hierarchy, you know, the unquestioned inequalities and
[Guest]: the lack of exit options.
[Guest]: And that's it.
[Guest]: And let me add a third point that even in societies where marriage rates are low and
[Guest]: where women do divorce, that doesn't get you to gender equality.
[Guest]: So let me give you the example of the Soviet Union, where as a result of the communist
[Guest]: model of extensive growth, there's very high female employment, there continues to be very
[Guest]: high female employment, there continues to be a high number of female headed households.
[Guest]: So many women have chosen, you know, that many women have chosen to exist independently,
[Guest]: and they can because they're economically autonomous.
[Guest]: But still, because totalitarian communism suffocated feminist activism, there is very
[Guest]: weak feminist activism, and women are not represented in the corridors of power.
[Guest]: And the Russian government continues to discriminate against women.
[Guest]: So there are weak protections against gender based violence.
[Guest]: So a couple of years ago, the Russian parliament actually decriminalized domestic battery.
[Guest]: So even if a woman is living, it's not about you yourself, whether you choose to get married
[Guest]: or not.
[Guest]: It's about the social and political environment that enables gender equality.
[Guest]: So I will come out and say marriage can be totally fine and loving and wonderful and
[Guest]: happy.
[Guest]: There is a range of other social and political conditions that are also important.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm kind of thinking looking ahead that assuming that the arc of human history goes
[Guest]: towards progress and goes towards a nicer place.
[Guest]: Oh yeah, I need to come back to your 300 years question, and I need to play the pessimist
[Amit Varma]: here.
[Guest]: Go ahead.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Okay, so I think that, so the reason I call my book, The Great Gender Divergence, is that
[Guest]: some countries have become much more gender equal, whereas in others, we see far slower
[Guest]: transitions to gender equality.
[Guest]: So despite rising growth, in much of the Middle East, North Africa and South Asia, we still
[Guest]: see very low rates of female employment, for example.
[Guest]: So that is what they call the divergence.
[Guest]: And there are reasons to think that that divergence might persist.
[Guest]: And let me highlight three things that pose a risk.
[Guest]: One is rising authoritarianism.
[Guest]: So gender equality is partly a matter of challenging patriarchal ideals, challenging ideas that
[Guest]: women should fast for their husbands, challenging ideas that women should perform subservience
[Guest]: by doing everything for their husband, doing the housework for their husbands, etc.
[Guest]: And that happens through debate, you know, what Amartya Sen calls the argumentative Indian.
[Guest]: And that flourishes in conditions where there is open debate, where there is free thought.
[Guest]: And so rising authoritarianism, which we now see across much of the world, can stifle that
[Guest]: public debate because people become more reluctant to speak out.
[Guest]: And so it's not even suppression of civil debate more broadly, it has a silencing effect
[Guest]: on feminist activism because it it mutes that culture of resistance, which is hugely important.
[Guest]: So where we see rising authoritarianism, we should expect to slow any kind of cultural
[Guest]: change.
[Guest]: And what's second point.
[Guest]: And so, for example, in China, even though there are very high rates of female employment,
[Guest]: even though women are enormously successful in business, crackdowns on Me Too, media blackouts,
[Guest]: media blackouts on Weibo and WeChat mean that many people regard sexual harassment and abuse
[Guest]: as inevitable.
[Guest]: And it is very difficult.
[Guest]: So debate is absolutely critical.
[Guest]: Open debate is hugely important.
[Guest]: Second issue is a primary driver of rising female employment is job creating economic
[Guest]: growth.
[Guest]: But there are two obstacles to that.
[Guest]: One is climate breakdown.
[Guest]: Climate breakdown, absolutely, as you know, and I don't even need to argue this point
[Guest]: is going to suppress job creation, right?
[Guest]: It's going to suppress economic growth through one environmental disasters, destruction of
[Guest]: physical infrastructure, and also high temperatures, which make it impossible to learn to acquire
[Guest]: human capital to be productive.
[Guest]: And so that will make it so much harder.
[Guest]: Third issue is automation, especially if our institutions continue to allow job killing
[Guest]: automation.
[Guest]: Automation doesn't necessarily need to kill jobs, it could augment labor.
[Guest]: But if our institution, so for example, in India, female labor force participation in
[Guest]: rural areas has declined as a result of mechanization of agriculture.
[Guest]: So you know, if you have mechanization in ways that reduce demand for labor in Bangladeshi
[Guest]: families, we've seen in factories, rather, since 2013, Bangladeshi factories have hired
[Guest]: fewer laborers, they've hired fewer low skilled laborers, because they've increasingly mechanized.
[Guest]: So if we have authoritarianism, or job killing automation, and also climate breakdown, then
[Guest]: that means that we're caught in what I call this patrilineal trap, that if the available
[Guest]: female earnings do not compensate for male honor, then women will continue to remain
[Guest]: at home.
[Guest]: And so that would be the story for South Asia, North Africa, and the Middle East, whereas
[Guest]: in Africa, which in much of Africa, like in Zambia, where I was, women will be trapped
[Guest]: in rural poverty, and they will continue to bear many children, their families will not
[Guest]: have the money to educate them.
[Guest]: So they will quit school at 16, bear lots of children and struggle to acquire the assets,
[Guest]: the resources to challenge dominant men to go to the cities where they learn about all
[Guest]: these different ideas.
[Guest]: You know, I am not going to, you know, everyone wants to know what will happen in the future.
[Guest]: And I'm not, and that's alchemy, right?
[Guest]: We cannot know, there's so much chaos and contingency.
[Guest]: But there are three reasons to think that great divergence will continue.
[Amit Varma]: So there I am the pessimist.
[Amit Varma]: I just, yeah, it's, it's a terrifying moment, because there's great cognitive dissonance,
[Amit Varma]: because I just realized that I'm optimistic on all three points you mentioned, but optimistic
[Amit Varma]: in the long term.
[Amit Varma]: I think in the short term and the medium term, I'm quite, I think the outlook is bleak, but
[Amit Varma]: I'm optimistic briefly in the long term, because, you know, as far as authoritarianism is concerned,
[Amit Varma]: I think, I hope that we're not doomed to this forever.
[Amit Varma]: And technology empowers individuals.
[Amit Varma]: And hopefully, we'll find a way out of this as far as climate change is concerned.
[Amit Varma]: I think in the long run, we will solve it.
[Amit Varma]: I have enough faith in human ingenuity, we've come through other crisis before.
[Amit Varma]: And if we don't, well, you know, what's a big deal of one species vanishes.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, adapting nuclear energy would just go a long way.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the campaign against nuclear is, you know, utterly daft, and I've spoken about
[Amit Varma]: it very often on this podcast.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not so worried about, you know, economic growth, either.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not, I'm not that worried about automation, either, because that's been a common concern
[Amit Varma]: throughout history, that, you know, machines will take away the job of humans, but any
[Amit Varma]: disruption is temporary.
[Amit Varma]: And in the end, productivity goes up, and it just works out for everybody's better.
[Amit Varma]: But even if I were to agree with you on all of these,
[Guest]: I just clarify, I'm not, I would not want to say what I think will happen.
[Unknown]: All I'm posing is three risks.
[Unknown]: Those are three risks.
[Guest]: And other people can assess whether or not they will happen.
[Guest]: All I'm saying, if those three things happen, then you should not expect a greater gender
[Amit Varma]: I get it.
[Amit Varma]: You're not forecasting and neither am I for that matter.
[Amit Varma]: But even assuming that these risks were to hold us back, it's an argument against, you
[Amit Varma]: know, that perhaps we may not progress to where we hope to progress.
[Amit Varma]: But my question was more like, if we do progress to where we progress in a thought experiment
[Amit Varma]: where you know, the gender divergence sort of ends that you get more or less equality
[Amit Varma]: between genders, then I think a concept like marriage, the way we look at it today, along
[Amit Varma]: with various other concepts, just it looks like one fixed template for a relationship,
[Amit Varma]: which is skewed in one particular way.
[Amit Varma]: And we need not follow this conventional template.
[Amit Varma]: There are many other templates for how people relate to each other.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in India, for example, people talk about the need for there to be a uniform civil
[Amit Varma]: code.
[Amit Varma]: And my point is, no matter what you feel of a uniform civil code, your ideal end state
[Amit Varma]: in a thought experiment is where there is no civil code, where people make voluntary
[Amit Varma]: contracts with each other with and voluntary agreements and live according to that.
[Amit Varma]: Obviously, that's never going to happen.
[Amit Varma]: It's it's at least not in a future I can foresee because society is just structured the way
[Amit Varma]: that it is right.
[Amit Varma]: And because of that, you do need protection for for women for different oppressed classes
[Amit Varma]: within society.
[Amit Varma]: But leaving that aside, moving on from sort of the question of, you know, marriage, which
[Amit Varma]: we normalized, tell me a little bit more about your academic journey, that when you you know,
[Amit Varma]: you get into academics, you've taken a very unconventional route to where you are, in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that you haven't been formally trained as it were in these fields.
[Amit Varma]: We'll talk about Twitter later, but you were set upon by a mob and I noticed one tweet
[Amit Varma]: from somebody saying, Oh, she calls herself an ethnographer, but she hasn't studied ethnography.
[Amit Varma]: She's done geography and this and that, to which my reaction, I mean, I just hate that
[Amit Varma]: kind of credentialism.
[Amit Varma]: My point always is you have to judge people by their work.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I haven't done a PhD in podcasting either.
[Amit Varma]: So fucking what and your work in that sense cannot speaks for itself.
[Amit Varma]: But how did you navigate your way through academia as it were like earlier, you've
[Amit Varma]: said, like, you know, in different episodes, I've spoken with academics about the great
[Amit Varma]: academic circle jerk, where it's like you're caught in what Indians would call a chakravu.
[Amit Varma]: That once you're playing that game, you're stuck in that game, you know, you've got to
[Amit Varma]: get published in certain journals, speak a certain kind of language, there are topics
[Amit Varma]: and themes that are fashionable.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, some subjects will get you funding, other subjects won't.
[Amit Varma]: And once you get stuck in that, it's just academics talking to other academics, you're
[Guest]: not going out and engaging with the world.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: But that's an active choice.
[Guest]: So lots of people complain.
[Guest]: So let me speak to two points.
[Guest]: Firstly, I would say on the so my three formal degrees are one philosophy to international
[Guest]: development three geography and the geography was geographies abroad field and then I studied
[Guest]: qualitative research methods and that entire year was ethnography and I was living with
[Guest]: families.
[Guest]: I was fluent about me.
[Guest]: I think that counts as ethnography.
[Guest]: Let me say one more point.
[Guest]: So each of the transition from philosophy to international development, that's a big
[Guest]: change because you're going from questioning the meaning of life with zero empirical content
[Guest]: to suddenly starting social science.
[Guest]: That's a transition.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: But I could do it because I was just going to read absolutely everything.
[Guest]: I mean, I devour.
[Guest]: One friend said, you know, you take the books like combine harvester in a field of daisies.
[Unknown]: Right.
[Guest]: And it's also important is the way that I read.
[Guest]: And this is something.
[Guest]: So I did a postgraduate certificate in higher education where I learned about active learning.
[Guest]: And this is the idea.
[Guest]: You know, passive learning is just reading a book.
[Guest]: But often my students might get to the end of the chapter and have no idea what they
[Guest]: just read.
[Guest]: And part of active learning is creatively engaging and questioning and and raising questions
[Guest]: about it.
[Guest]: And that's how I try to approach books by asking questions or or thinking what this
[Guest]: prompts.
[Guest]: So I've always been actively.
[Guest]: So it's not just about the volume of the books.
[Guest]: The volume of books I've read, but also about the way that I read in a in a critical style,
[Guest]: thinking about it.
[Guest]: And Twitter really helps because sometimes, you know, I try to explain, et cetera.
[Guest]: And then to go back to your question about being beholden to narrow gatekeepers.
[Guest]: Yes, absolutely.
[Guest]: Some people complain that one, each discipline privilege is a specific kind of research.
[Guest]: So the geography journals wanted to talk about space, for example.
[Guest]: And they complain that they're constantly jumping through hoops.
[Guest]: But that in itself is a choice that we're making.
[Guest]: We're saying, I want career advancement.
[Guest]: And so then I will do what these people want.
[Guest]: And I have decided that what's important to me is not my job title.
[Guest]: If I'm senior lecturer or reader, so what?
[Guest]: So what?
[Guest]: Like, that's not the most important thing to me.
[Guest]: If my department thinks that I'm it's it's just not important to me.
[Guest]: And this goes back to, you know, my my fundamental idea that I need to work out what's important
[Guest]: to me.
[Guest]: And by pursuing that, I can liberate myself from these social conventions, which we can
[Guest]: question, which we can emancipate ourselves from.
[Guest]: So I have incrementally realized that I do not need to be beholden to conventions.
[Guest]: And it's also other people encouraging me and supporting me.
[Guest]: So there was this, I saw this prize, this blog prize that I'd never blogged.
[Guest]: But I saw there was a prize for blogging.
[Guest]: And so I thought, hey, I'll go for that.
[Guest]: And then I started blogging and I enjoyed it because that was another way of sharing
[Guest]: my research with the world.
[Guest]: And I've increasingly realized that that can have value and a useful because there are
[Guest]: many economists who might, you know, not read all that huge volume of anthropological of
[Guest]: quality literature, but can quickly go to my blogs and find something interesting.
[Guest]: And I can synthesize these literatures and I can share these ideas and I can communicate
[Guest]: with a far bigger audience.
[Guest]: And I came to increasingly realize that, you know, journals, you know, are a locked journal
[Guest]: that one, many people in many parts of the world cannot afford and cannot access.
[Guest]: And even if they could access, you know, it's only about eight people reading it because
[Guest]: they need to get the reference or the citation.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't understand why so many brilliant minds, enormously clever, brilliant minds
[Guest]: might be spending all their time, all their resources, publishing things that no one's
[Guest]: going to read, that I don't get that, that model doesn't appear to me.
[Guest]: But now there's blogging and writing this book, yeah, then I can actually be sharing
[Guest]: ideas and what I'm trying to do now, you know, this isn't what my goal now is really not
[Guest]: the mission of Alice Evans.
[Guest]: I'm trying to build a new field and I will only, and I can't do that alone.
[Guest]: I absolutely cannot get, I cannot pretend that I will get the answer absolutely right
[Guest]: by myself.
[Guest]: So what I really want to do is for others to be excited by this project and join me.
[Guest]: And, you know, they may, you know, everyone has got their different skills and interests
[Guest]: and whether it's a comparative study of Bangladesh or India, or whether it's looking at the impact
[Guest]: of automation or whether it's looking about, you know, marriage, whatever.
[Guest]: I want to share this research so that other people realise, hey, this is a big fundamental
[Guest]: question and we want to answer it too.
[Guest]: We want to take a stab at that bit to look at what's happening in Spain.
[Guest]: So the more that I, what I'm actually trying to do is lower the barriers to entry.
[Guest]: I want more people, I want to create this field, create, you know, help people.
[Guest]: So I'm building the jigsaw, but I want to make it easier for other people to study these
[Guest]: questions in ways that they find exciting and tantalising.
[Guest]: So I'm not remotely territorial.
[Guest]: And this is part of you, I'm de-territorialising my own terrain.
[Guest]: I'm saying, hey, come with me.
[Guest]: And so three weeks ago, I was in Boston and I gave a talk with economists who were great
[Guest]: and we were talking about these ideas.
[Guest]: And I'm also giving a talk to anthropologists.
[Guest]: So I want to speak to all these different disciplines, because there are so many people
[Guest]: with so many brilliant tools and techniques and their own ideas, their own ways of analysing
[Guest]: these things.
[Guest]: And I want everyone to jump on board, because there have always been many books on the rise
[Guest]: of the West, you know, economic divergence, but not on gender.
[Guest]: And so now I think, hey, let's take a crack at it.
[Guest]: And I'll take the first step.
[Guest]: I'll get out the broad outline, but, you know, there'll be a lot of things that I'll get
[Guest]: wrong.
[Guest]: So, you know, let's, you know, all hands to the deck, I say.
[Unknown]: So it is a different model.
[Guest]: It is a different model of academia.
[Guest]: And another thing I would say, another way it's different.
[Guest]: So when I try to reduce the barriers to entry to studying these questions and to share research
[Guest]: between different brilliant minds, whether that's through my podcasts or through my blogs.
[Guest]: Another aspect is academics have historically spent a huge amount of time applying for grants.
[Guest]: So they'll write these long, long, long documents.
[Guest]: So for example, earlier this year, I spent ages, maybe three months applying for two
[Guest]: million euros in funding because I wanted to get five PhDs and postdocs to study my
[Guest]: research question, comparative histories and gender in their own languages.
[Guest]: So in Arabic, in Mandarin, you know, I thought, hey, let's get more Alice Evanses, but in
[Guest]: their own languages, because there's a huge amount of data, I can't access it, I'm flawed.
[Guest]: Let's have other people with their own knowledge doing what I'm doing.
[Guest]: Let's multiply Alice Evans, but you know, in their way.
[Guest]: I didn't get that funding, but it was an enormous cost in my time, an enormous cost in my time.
[Guest]: So that was a total waste of time.
[Guest]: And I got nothing out of it.
[Guest]: And many academics do that.
[Guest]: They spend their time chasing grants that they don't get.
[Guest]: So now what I'm doing is actually trying to cultivate an alternative way of academic inquiry.
[Guest]: Let me share this research and other people of their own volition will find it interesting
[Guest]: and choose to do it.
[Guest]: So we're not going through some complex bureaucracy.
[Guest]: It's not that I'm applying for grants, then recruiting and hiring RAs who are then under
[Guest]: my management.
[Guest]: What I'm saying is I'm making here are these questions, if you like it, come aboard of
[Guest]: your own independent volition and we'll do it.
[Guest]: So there are numbers of ways in which I'm offering or exploring or experimenting with
[Unknown]: different ways of doing things.
[Amit Varma]: I love the kind of open source inquiry that this is headed towards.
[Amit Varma]: And I appreciate what you said earlier about it being a choice, whether you play the academic
[Amit Varma]: game or not.
[Amit Varma]: But the incentives are all tailored in one direction.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a common lament I hear even from people within academics that listen, we don't
[Amit Varma]: have a choice but to play that game.
[Amit Varma]: So one, are you an outlier in that sense that you have chosen not to play the game and you
[Amit Varma]: walked away and you're trying to do something different?
[Amit Varma]: And two, when you talk about building a new field, do you mean building a new approach
[Amit Varma]: to doing the kind of work you're doing?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you also mean building a new field field?
[Guest]: And can you elaborate upon that?
[Guest]: So I just mean the great gender divergence.
[Guest]: So no one has ever.
[Guest]: So the most fundamental fact about humanity that we don't know is why some countries have
[Guest]: become so much more gender equal than others, all of patriarchy, but we can't explain that.
[Guest]: So that's the field that the great gender divergence, that's what I want people to explore
[Guest]: alongside me.
[Guest]: Now why am I not beholden to career incentives to such a degree?
[Guest]: I would say two things.
[Guest]: One is it's this intrinsic love of learning.
[Guest]: And that matters more to me than any title people can give me.
[Guest]: So I just want to know the answer.
[Guest]: I jump out of bed each morning because I'm excited by a book.
[Unknown]: So yeah, so what is this intrinsic quest?
[Guest]: I mean, it's like, you know, sometimes people ask me for productivity hacks, or, you know,
[Guest]: what's your routine?
[Guest]: And all that is endogenous.
[Guest]: Because what's underlying all this is like this intense, creative, obsessive lust and
[Guest]: passion to understand the answer to stuff.
[Guest]: So that drives me absolutely.
[Guest]: And that's what I think is important.
[Guest]: And that drives me.
[Guest]: So that's my fuel.
[Guest]: And the other aspect, so one is my goals may be different.
[Guest]: Another aspect is perhaps money doesn't matter to me that much.
[Guest]: And that may be in partly because of my background of economic privilege.
[Guest]: You know, there are many people for whom they have children, they have financial responsibilities,
[Guest]: they may want to acquire more wealth.
[Guest]: But money has never been that important to me.
[Guest]: Money is not something, I mean, what am I going to do?
[Guest]: Buy more books?
[Guest]: I mean, I already get, yeah, I spend a lot of money on books, but you know, there's only
[Guest]: so many books I can read.
[Guest]: So one is I'm really, so I have the economic luxury of not caring that much about money.
[Guest]: And that's a privileged position, I totally accept that.
[Guest]: The third aspect that I would say is incredibly important, and I keep coming back to this
[Guest]: is that I have been enabled to do this by other people having faith and confidence in
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: So Princeton University Press, when I explained this project to them, I told them I would
[Guest]: need eight or nine years to study the global history of gender.
[Guest]: And they accepted it on my terms.
[Guest]: And so they gave me a contract with that long time horizon.
[Guest]: So whereas other academics might be under pressure to publish every single year, I have
[Guest]: this contract.
[Guest]: So Princeton University Press, I absolutely thank and support them.
[Guest]: I've also been able to cultivate a number of grants that, you know, enable me to travel
[Guest]: around the world.
[Guest]: So that gives me a sense of financial freedom, financial autonomy, you know, people having
[Guest]: belief in Alice Evans.
[Guest]: So it's absolutely, so going back to your point is, me, my love of learning, to me really
[Guest]: not caring about money.
[Guest]: And because of my economic privilege, and, and three, other people's faith and support
[Guest]: in this project.
[Amit Varma]: So let's double click on the love of learning.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, you said you read absolutely everything.
[Amit Varma]: I think you said that a few times, and I tell my writing students don't use adverbs.
[Amit Varma]: But in this case, absolutely seems quite apt for how much you do seem to read because almost
[Amit Varma]: every day on Twitter, you're like recommending a couple of interesting books, and I've bought
[Amit Varma]: a bunch of books just because I've seen you tweet about them excitedly.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about what is your process of what you earlier described as active
[Amit Varma]: learning?
[Unknown]: Like, how do you read?
[Amit Varma]: Do you have a note taking app?
[Amit Varma]: How do you take notes?
[Amit Varma]: You know, what what sort of your speed of reading in the sense, one of the things I'm
[Amit Varma]: kind of blessed with, which enables me to do this podcast is I can read both fast and
[Amit Varma]: deep at the same time, I don't skim, I can do that I can take notes, but I'm, I have
[Amit Varma]: a feeling you read much more than me.
[Amit Varma]: So I'd love to know about what your methods are of assimilating knowledge of giving them
[Amit Varma]: the time to seep into you and for you to think about them, contextualize them in the light
[Amit Varma]: of everything else that you've read.
[Amit Varma]: So take me a bit through that process, like you say, you bounce out of bed in the morning,
[Amit Varma]: because you're looking forward to reading a book.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, so what's a typical day in your life and you know, what is this active learning
[Amit Varma]: process like?
[Guest]: Okay, I want to answer that in two parts.
[Guest]: One is I want to share active learning that might be useful to others.
[Guest]: So I, as I mentioned earlier, I did this two year qualification in how people learn and
[Guest]: I was fascinated by that process of learning.
[Guest]: And I think that's enormously important, because we can be more productive if we if we apply
[Guest]: active learning.
[Guest]: And so I tell my students four, four fundamental things.
[Guest]: So, one is when they read a paper or a book, they should be able to reflect on it and synthesize
[Guest]: that material in a single sentence.
[Guest]: So that active synthesis, so what is the main argument?
[Guest]: Two, they should look what evidence is presented to support that argument.
[Guest]: So they should look through the book saying, well, where is the evidence does that and
[Guest]: then three, does that stack up on their read?
[Guest]: Does it support the argument and to be critical of the evidence or the methodology and for
[Guest]: them to think, well, how does this approach differ from other perspectives, other literature
[Guest]: in that field?
[Guest]: So it's that four prong approach, which I use to which I encourage my students to for
[Guest]: active learning.
[Guest]: And then I always, yeah, so that that's what I encourage my students to do.
[Guest]: Even on my process myself, again, trying to apply my active learning, I sometimes use
[Guest]: Twitter here, because what I try to do is to present a book in a way that appeals to
[Guest]: a broader audience.
[Guest]: And that pushes me to be creative, to think, well, let me make this interesting to a wider
[Guest]: audience.
[Guest]: So let me connect this to a bigger, bigger question.
[Guest]: Let me help people understand this.
[Guest]: Let me help outsiders understand this.
[Guest]: So the more that I'm creatively engaging, thinking about how to present that material
[Guest]: and present that evidence is actually, let me confess, part of my active learning process.
[Guest]: And I'm thinking about the ideas relating it to the broader question.
[Guest]: So that public engagement is actually part of my active learning.
[Guest]: I mean, of course, I don't, I don't tweet about everything that I read, you know, I'll
[Guest]: tell you a story from.
[Guest]: So I have this software called Zotero, which is a form of referencing software.
[Guest]: And so just the number of things that I've cited, so that's not the totality or the totality
[Guest]: of everything I read.
[Guest]: But I think in the past three years, it's now up to three and a half thousand books
[Guest]: and papers.
[Guest]: I mean, it's a lot, but it's always with this mechanism, always with this mechanism.
[Amit Varma]: That's three a day, basically.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: How many books do you read in a day?
[Guest]: It might be some combination of books and papers.
[Guest]: Oh, yes, you asked, you asked about my, my, my day routine.
[Guest]: So usually I jump out of bed, I do that, I do the book, I have this, you know, the hive
[Guest]: of activity, and then exercise is very important to me.
[Guest]: So I usually spend either one or two hours exercising at some sort of middle of the day
[Guest]: or something like that.
[Guest]: So I do my exercise.
[Guest]: And that's really important.
[Guest]: And I think that can also, I think, you know, there's huge endorphin release, it's important
[Guest]: to be away from the screen.
[Guest]: So my best ideas come to me when I'm charging through the countryside, running.
[Guest]: And I think there's also, and I don't know the the academic research on this, so I present
[Guest]: this only as an anecdote, there's also a sense of confidence through being athletic and physically
[Guest]: strong.
[Guest]: Like, I think one reason why I'm not intimidated when I'm traveling around the world is I can
[Guest]: see men and not be intimidated by them.
[Guest]: So I think that that could be one, but the mental health, I have huge mental health benefits
[Guest]: from being very athletic, going through the countryside, fresh air.
[Guest]: I love it.
[Guest]: And I do a range of sports.
[Guest]: I run, I cycle, I swim, I do yoga, I do Pilates, I lift weights, I do everything.
[Unknown]: And I get a great joy out of that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you mentioned before we started recording that you went to a gym with a friend and you
[Amit Varma]: were stronger than all the men there.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'd be just the other way around.
[Amit Varma]: If I went to a gym, I'd be weaker than all the women there.
[Amit Varma]: So there you go, playing to those stereotypes as well.
[Amit Varma]: Because my next question, there's always a trade off when you get into a subject between
[Amit Varma]: thinking too broadly and becoming too narrow.
[Amit Varma]: Now, one of the traps that people in academics have fallen into is they've become what my
[Amit Varma]: friend Ajay Shah would describe as the prisoners of domain expertise, right?
[Amit Varma]: So they choose a specialization and they are kind of trapped there, you know, growth in
[Amit Varma]: GDP in the middle class in Congo between the years 1632 to 1633, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And they're completely trapped there.
[Amit Varma]: And that's all that they can see.
[Amit Varma]: And they're not bringing wider insights to bear on their work, even from their own discipline,
[Amit Varma]: forget other disciplines.
[Amit Varma]: And the allure of going broad is that you can bring different frames from different
[Amit Varma]: disciplines to look at a problem that you can, you know, you may look at something that
[Amit Varma]: is happening in one country and use your insights from other countries and be able to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: see things that a domain specialist wouldn't do, I think, in, you know, somewhere, I forget
[Amit Varma]: where you wrote this, but you quoted Fukuyama, where you said that, you know, you don't know
[Amit Varma]: your own country, if it's the only country, you know, something to that effect, right?
[Amit Varma]: And that's beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: The danger, however, of being broad, is that whenever you comment on anything that is narrow
[Amit Varma]: on any specific thing, a narrow specialist who has studied only that thing will say,
[Amit Varma]: hey, you're being too broad, you're generalising, you're painting with broad brushstrokes, right?
[Amit Varma]: And this seems to me to be an insurmountable problem.
[Guest]: No, it's not.
[Guest]: Tell me about it.
[Guest]: I absolutely agree.
[Guest]: I need to be as expert as every single expert.
[Guest]: So for every topic, whether it's marriage in medieval Europe, I need to know that literature.
[Guest]: I need to be absolutely on top of that literature.
[Guest]: And I don't believe there is a trade-off between breadth and depth, if you have infinite time
[Guest]: and an absolute passion to understand it.
[Guest]: So the comparative lens, so for example, by comparing East Asia and South Asia, we can
[Guest]: understand the massive importance of job creating economic growth.
[Guest]: So back in 1900, both of these places were extremely patriarchal.
[Guest]: So South Korea, Korean women, rather, gangban, elite Korean women were veiled.
[Guest]: They even had this seesaw whereby behind the walls of the household, girls would play so
[Guest]: that one could jump high and see over the barricades.
[Guest]: So there were patrilocal marriages in East Asia.
[Guest]: Women were, yeah, inter-arranged marriages with very little autonomy.
[Guest]: Confucianism had the three obediences, be subservient to your husband, your father,
[Guest]: your son.
[Guest]: You know, Chinese women, their feet were broken and bound.
[Guest]: Culture in China always celebrated female sacrifice for male honour.
[Guest]: But through job creating economic growth, mass manufacturing, at first families might
[Guest]: be reluctant for their daughters to go out to cities because they were worried about
[Guest]: losing honour, about losing faith that other people would talk and their daughters would
[Guest]: become unmarriageable.
[Guest]: And all this resonates with what's happening in India today, right, that families are reluctant
[Guest]: to allow women to go to the cities because they worry about their daughters becoming
[Guest]: unmarriageable.
[Guest]: And they only do it in cases of economic desperation.
[Guest]: But in East Asia, job creating economic growth was so intensive that girls, the flocks of
[Guest]: women were going to the cities, that it became a normal expected part of adolescence.
[Guest]: So no family needed to worry about sticking their neck out and others gossiping because
[Guest]: it became so normal.
[Guest]: So that big comparative lens really enabled me to see the importance of job creating economic
[Guest]: growth.
[Guest]: So that breadth helped.
[Guest]: Now I'm in India to understand the depth, right.
[Guest]: So I've been to Rajasthan, I was in Jaipur, I was in Udaipur, I went to a small village
[Guest]: near Bharatpur, I'm also going to Bangalore, I'm going to Chennai, Mumbai and Calcutta.
[Guest]: I'm speaking to, I've been speaking to Dalit journalists, Dalit politicians, Muslim families,
[Guest]: students at JNU, housewives, domestic workers, all these kinds of people, because I need
[Guest]: to understand the depth, right.
[Guest]: This is getting at the depth.
[Guest]: This is understanding people's stories.
[Guest]: This is understanding the nuance.
[Guest]: This is understanding every single life and people's diverse struggles, their aspirations,
[Guest]: their beliefs, how they see it.
[Guest]: So I am, and I admit, I mean, you know, I know my project sounds outrageously ambitious.
[Guest]: You know, I'm trying to do breadth and depth and I believe, and I may not get it perfectly
[Guest]: right, but I'm trying to do it all because I believe that one should do it all.
[Guest]: And so that's why I want people to help me too, you know, to help me, you know, where
[Guest]: I fail, they should try.
[Guest]: I'd like them to come and help me.
[Amit Varma]: The two keywords in your answer were infinite time.
[Amit Varma]: You said it's possible to combine these two.
[Amit Varma]: There is no trade off if you have infinite time, but of course we don't.
[Amit Varma]: That is a fundamental scarcity, right?
[Amit Varma]: Princeton gave you eight years or nine years or whatever, and you think they are being
[Amit Varma]: generous.
[Amit Varma]: But when you're in your ninth year and you realise you need another 18 years more and
[Amit Varma]: they're knocking at the door, that'll be interesting.
[Amit Varma]: Like one, I would say that, yeah, at some point you can perhaps reach the stage where, while
[Amit Varma]: you're coming at it from a broad perspective, you're not making major errors on any particular
[Amit Varma]: domain.
[Amit Varma]: You can get that kind of depth.
[Amit Varma]: I accept that.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, I think that given that one doesn't have infinite time, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I would imagine that at some level that there is a trade off.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm guessing by saying that you can do both breadth and depth, you mean that you
[Amit Varma]: can get adequately deep, that you're not making any big mistakes?
[Guest]: Well, let me at least try.
[Guest]: Let me at least try.
[Guest]: So I'm not going to pretend that my book is going to be perfect.
[Guest]: There will be things that I get wrong and other people should rightly call me out.
[Guest]: And I welcome them calling me out.
[Guest]: And even in this journey of research in the book, there are major ways in which I've revised
[Guest]: my beliefs because I'm constantly learning.
[Guest]: So there were things that I previously didn't understand that I've revised my beliefs.
[Guest]: Every single day I'm revising my beliefs.
[Guest]: My learning curves are astronomical.
[Guest]: So let me not say that I think I can get it perfectly right.
[Guest]: Let me just say that I agree we should try to master both breadth and depth and I will
[Guest]: give it my best shot.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one of the things that struck me when I was reading all your essays, I mean, you
[Amit Varma]: call them blog posts, but they're all these wonderful essays.
[Amit Varma]: Most of them is that, you know, one that I found that I have something to learn, not
[Amit Varma]: just from the content of it, which, of course, I do, but also from the approach, which is
[Amit Varma]: an approach where you're constantly rocking your own priors, as it were, to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: take the name of your podcast, like you wrote this piece about three things you got wrong
[Amit Varma]: about patriarchy.
[Amit Varma]: And the first of them is, quote, when I lack globally comparative knowledge, I was blind
[Amit Varma]: to country specific characteristics, stop, quote, and there are two others.
[Amit Varma]: And you're kind of talking about all the things you got wrong.
[Amit Varma]: And this brings me to your fascinating use of Twitter, which I absolutely love, by the
[Amit Varma]: way.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing about Twitter, and a lesson that I learned early, is that not everyone
[Amit Varma]: is there for the same reasons that you might be there for, right?
[Amit Varma]: So my imagining of Twitter was that, okay, you go out there, you put your links out there,
[Amit Varma]: you do all of that any conversations that happen, happen in good faith, and this is
[Amit Varma]: like a very 12 year old view of it.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, it's not like that there are different games being played on Twitter itself,
[Amit Varma]: there are ideological tribes being formed within which you have people trying to raise
[Amit Varma]: their own status by attacking others, and you know, passing judgment on others always
[Amit Varma]: makes you feel more virtuous, because you're automatically on a pedestal if you're passing
[Amit Varma]: judgment on others.
[Amit Varma]: And that's like a toxic face of Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: Now, by and large, I love Twitter, because it's a great if you curate your feet, well,
[Amit Varma]: we feed well, you have access to the finest minds in the world thinking aloud every day
[Amit Varma]: for your benefit.
[Amit Varma]: This is such a bloody privilege, unimaginable 40 years ago, right?
[Amit Varma]: Now, what I see you as doing is that on the one hand, you're talking about the things
[Amit Varma]: that you've learned and the research that you've done all of which is very rigorous,
[Amit Varma]: which has come through reading many books.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, whenever one reads a blog post by you clicking the links is, you know, a source
[Amit Varma]: of learning by itself.
[Amit Varma]: So on the one hand, you're doing that you're presenting all of that.
[Amit Varma]: On the other hand, you're thinking aloud, you know, you're walking through a town, you're
[Amit Varma]: talking to the bus driver, you're talking to this person, you go to a wedding, you talk
[Amit Varma]: to three people, and you're putting that out there, right?
[Amit Varma]: And you're thinking aloud.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a very open source kind of way of thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And these two are happening in the same account.
[Amit Varma]: And even if they weren't, it wouldn't matter because, you know, people could still get
[Amit Varma]: after you.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, this is not a space where everybody is going to give you the benefit
[Amit Varma]: of the doubt and figure out that, oh, this is what she's doing.
[Amit Varma]: And most people and I believe that the silent majority out there has goodwill, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it's this process of seeking knowledge and refining knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: Most people are like that most people are good.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, mobs will randomly form when somebody will interpret something you said
[Amit Varma]: in bad faith.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll and you know, we won't go too much into detail because I just find it unpleasant
[Amit Varma]: to think about it.
[Amit Varma]: But you've been at the receiving end of a mob like this recently, I have a number of
[Amit Varma]: times in the past as well, right?
[Amit Varma]: So how do you get passes?
[Amit Varma]: How do you like what you do on Twitter by having opening the space for dialogue, where
[Amit Varma]: you're essentially telling everybody that, hey, I'm thinking aloud, I could be wrong,
[Amit Varma]: tell me how I'm wrong.
[Amit Varma]: I learned from that I'll incorporate it, which is not just posturing because you actually
[Amit Varma]: do that.
[Amit Varma]: It's very obvious from your blog post that you're engaging with everything that kind
[Amit Varma]: of comes at you.
[Amit Varma]: But how do you sort of then deal with this kind of toxicity?
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, you can't and I remember having this conversation once with our mutual
[Amit Varma]: friend Shruti Rajgopalan, and you know, and I was kind of telling her that everyone's
[Amit Varma]: looking at you so closely.
[Amit Varma]: They're so determined to misinterpret every damn thing that you say, that you almost have
[Amit Varma]: to be idiot proof.
[Amit Varma]: And her argument was and I now feel she was right.
[Amit Varma]: And her argument was that you can't be idiot proof all the time.
[Amit Varma]: If they want to find something, they'll find something.
[Amit Varma]: All you can do is be intellectually honest and say what you have to say.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your feelings on this, given that it's such an important part of your process
[Amit Varma]: of active learning, like you pointed out?
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: So one, I would raise another way in which Twitter has been incredibly useful, is that
[Guest]: so many people, knowing that I'm traveling through India have contacted me saying, Hey,
[Guest]: Alice, would you like to meet up and they've been incredibly kind to the other day, let
[Guest]: me give you a story.
[Guest]: So I, and I'll come to answer any of your questions in due course, but I received a
[Guest]: message from this anonymous account with the name of a white male European.
[Guest]: And they said, Hi, Alice, I'm in Jaipur, do you want to meet up?
[Guest]: And I was like, sorry, not to be rude, but who are you?
[Guest]: It's just like this anonymous account.
[Guest]: And they said, Oh, I'm 23, I'm an MPhil student at JNU.
[Guest]: I was like, so you're female, you know, because I have, you know, I need to be a little bit
[Guest]: careful before, you know, jumping, jumping on every opportunity.
[Guest]: And they say, yes, yes, yes.
[Guest]: And so we met.
[Guest]: And she was tremendously fast.
[Guest]: So she came from a Hindu Muslim family.
[Guest]: She told me all about her life, her student politics at JNU.
[Guest]: And the following day, which she invited me to meet her family, and they were incredibly
[Guest]: warm and welcoming.
[Guest]: Then we went to the village the day after that, and we met many of their extended Muslim
[Guest]: relatives.
[Guest]: And so I learned so much.
[Guest]: And we were traveling together and we're meeting up, I think tomorrow, in fact.
[Guest]: And so I learned a great deal from her.
[Guest]: And there have been so many other interactions like that.
[Guest]: So just yesterday for breakfast, a guy who was involved in JNU student politics around
[Guest]: the time of the 2012 gang rapes, and how he became involved in the protests for, you know,
[Guest]: resisting impunity for male violence.
[Guest]: So many people have contacted me through Twitter.
[Guest]: So many Indians have invited me to their home.
[Guest]: So for example, I posted data on Ahmedabad asking, you know, why is the rate of female
[Guest]: labor force participation so low, 13%?
[Guest]: And then someone contacted me.
[Guest]: She said, Oh, I live in Ahmedabad, would you like to visit?
[Guest]: So and people have asked me to, invited me to Calcutta, you know, I'll raise the question,
[Guest]: well, what's going on here?
[Guest]: And people invite me to their homes.
[Guest]: And so that's great.
[Guest]: And so Twitter has enabled me, a total outsider, because of people's warmth and their generosity
[Guest]: and their kindness and their support and understanding for this project.
[Guest]: You know, that would not be possible without Twitter.
[Guest]: And so I'm so grateful that Twitter has enabled so many different people.
[Guest]: Now, I, of course, grant that many of those people using Twitter are enormously privileged,
[Guest]: economically privileged, often Brahmin.
[Guest]: But also, through Twitter, people see that I have a, they see my profile, they know who
[Guest]: I am.
[Guest]: So I've also been able to contact Dalit journalists, Dalit politicians, so you know, it's having
[Guest]: your name people saying, Oh, that's that person they've been tweeting.
[Guest]: So that gives you that helps.
[Guest]: And also through the many of the people that I meet, I'm able to expand their network.
[Guest]: So for example, the woman I met from the Hindu Muslim family, it was her who invited invited
[Guest]: me to the villages where people were living in a state of, you know, not, you know, prosperity.
[Guest]: So I'm, I am able to use these networks to access more and different people.
[Guest]: So one is, Twitter has been enormously beneficial, and maybe let's say in several ways, one reaching
[Guest]: different people learning from them to the critique.
[Guest]: So that and because Twitter is so enormously valuable for something that I privilege, which
[Guest]: is learning that almost any cost is worth it.
[Guest]: So after the after the, a couple of Twitter mobs, I did protect my account.
[Guest]: And I did lock it, but I unlocked it for two reasons.
[Guest]: One is I saw someone celebrating the fact they cancelled me.
[Guest]: And I thought that was so disgusting.
[Guest]: And I thought if someone is celebrating gleefully, suppressing my speech, that I thought was
[Guest]: dangerous for other people.
[Guest]: I did not want to perpetuate an environment that someone thought, yes, we've cancelled
[Guest]: her primarily because I was worried about I thought I don't want to be part of that
[Guest]: if they think they're going to know let's not.
[Guest]: But I also realize I also because I privilege my research, because I privilege, because
[Guest]: I prioritize learning, and because I realized the gains to Twitter, I wanted to unlock my
[Guest]: account to allow some abuse.
[Guest]: You know, that's a trade off, right?
[Guest]: I was willing to endure some abuse, because the gains to my learning is so huge from Twitter.
[Unknown]: So that's, so that's, so that's the second point to the third point that enables me to
[Guest]: third point is that I have been very lucky that I have many kind friends, that when they
[Guest]: do see nastiness, they reach out.
[Guest]: So and they express kindness, and that helps me realize, you know, that gives me some support
[Guest]: and feeling that, you know, it's very upsetting when people say hateful things, that's hurtful.
[Guest]: And when people, when friends reach out, and they say they understand, and they and they
[Guest]: and they think that it that it's unfair, that legitimizes us and that actually relates to
[Guest]: a broader point in terms of feminist consciousness and the consciousness of marginalized groups
[Guest]: more broadly, that many people may be privately critical of something, but they can be emboldened
[Guest]: to resist once they have the support and encouragement of others.
[Guest]: And so that's why I always emphasize this point of friendship and peer support.
[Guest]: And Shruti has always given me support, and you did too.
[Guest]: And I'm grateful for that.
[Unknown]: And then a final point, so to say, yeah, so I think those and so how do I, but I won't
[Guest]: deny that I won't deny that these things are hurtful, but particularly because I would
[Guest]: never I would never want to hurt people.
[Guest]: Like I would never want to upset people, like I care, I do care about people's feelings.
[Guest]: So I wouldn't want people to feel hurt by things.
[Guest]: And I also need to learn, I need to learn to be more careful in how I present things.
[Guest]: So I'm not going to blame trolls for getting it wrong.
[Guest]: You know, I wouldn't even I shouldn't even call them trolls.
[Guest]: I should be more careful in how I present my research.
[Guest]: And that's absolutely on me.
[Guest]: And that's something that I learned through trial and error, and occasional trolling.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I'll push back a little bit of that very last thing you said, because the truth
[Amit Varma]: is, no matter how careful you are, if people want to come after you, they'll find a reason
[Amit Varma]: to come after you.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, a lot of what has been said about you has really been said in bad faith.
[Amit Varma]: And if bad faith is your starting point, then it doesn't matter specifically what you say.
[Amit Varma]: But but yeah, I mean, sort of I kind of get what you're where you're coming from.
[Amit Varma]: And it's always disturbing, like my, my way of dealing with it also, you know, is a way
[Amit Varma]: of providing dopamine to myself.
[Amit Varma]: In the sense, I realized at one point, and this was a right wing mob, which attacked
[Amit Varma]: me after I criticized demonetization, that one, my strategy was just to block everyone,
[Amit Varma]: not just block people who were trolling me or abusing me, but block anyone who was being
[Amit Varma]: rude.
[Amit Varma]: So my habit is block anyone who's being rude, who's engaging in bad faith, either with me
[Amit Varma]: or with a friend, just block.
[Amit Varma]: And after a point, I realized that days which were quiet, I was sort of missing the dopamine
[Amit Varma]: hits that each block gave me.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you could say I was being addicted to blocking people.
[Amit Varma]: But once I became aware of this, I successfully fought this addiction.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, I could have, you know, been deliberately provocative just to be able to block people.
[Amit Varma]: But anyway, thankfully, I haven't gone down, down that road.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, let's take a quick commercial break now.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other side of the break, we'll, you know, continue talking about your life,
[Amit Varma]: but also actually get to your work, the great gender divergence.
[Unknown]: So thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time.
[Amit Varma]: I love the freedom the form gave me.
[Amit Varma]: And I feel I was shaped by it in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons.
[Amit Varma]: And now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now, I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com, where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free.
[Amit Varma]: Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Alice Evans about her great work on gender, specifically her forthcoming
[Amit Varma]: book called The Great Gender Divergence, which we're all waiting for, which even Princeton
[Amit Varma]: is waiting for, though they are pretty patient.
[Amit Varma]: I don't feel like waiting another eight or nine years for it.
[Amit Varma]: So here's the thing, you know, I right when I began my research for this, obviously, the
[Amit Varma]: first step is you Google somebody's name, and there's an actress by the name of Alice
[Amit Varma]: Evans.
[Amit Varma]: And I was like, what is this?
[Amit Varma]: We must make sure that our Alice is the first Google search result and this other person,
[Amit Varma]: it's just intolerable.
[Amit Varma]: But leaving that aside, tell me a little bit about how you arrived at this subject in terms
[Amit Varma]: of this is what I'm interested in, and this is what I want to do.
[Amit Varma]: Like you already spoke about going to Zambia and doing that, you know, the narrow study
[Amit Varma]: that you did.
[Amit Varma]: But how did that process take place where you kind of broadened your view and you said
[Amit Varma]: that no, I don't just want to study A or B or C, I want to study the whole damn alphabet.
[Amit Varma]: How did that come about?
[Guest]: Well, I was always interested in these long term comparative studies.
[Guest]: I've seen that through my rural urban contrast, my Cambodia, Zambia contrast, so I really
[Guest]: enjoyed that.
[Guest]: And I've always been interested in examining the causes of how the world came to be.
[Guest]: So some, for example, economists or political scientists might examine the effects of some
[Guest]: intervention or some shock.
[Guest]: I've always been interested in why is our world like as it is.
[Guest]: So that was my prior disposition, though, I tell you, I actually stopped researching
[Guest]: gender in about 2017, no, 2016, 17, because as I was saying earlier, there really were,
[Guest]: even though I was publishing fine in very nice journals, no one was really that interested
[Guest]: in my research.
[Guest]: And there just wasn't the environment.
[Guest]: People just, they weren't bothered.
[Guest]: No one else was doing what I was doing.
[Guest]: So I stopped it.
[Guest]: And I did labour repression and global supply chains.
[Guest]: And I went on a total tangent of looking at corporate accountability.
[Guest]: I compared the political, the politics of labour repression in Bangladesh and Vietnam.
[Guest]: So I was, I'd even given up on gender because there was so many, you know, for example,
[Guest]: you know, in gender theory, there's often a lot of understanding gender identities and
[Guest]: gender fluidity and performances of gender, whereas you have these other, economists might
[Guest]: be looking at smaller processes, you know, RCTs.
[Guest]: So no one was doing these big comparative studies.
[Guest]: And I think I was a little bit lonely in the sense that I just, there wasn't anyone who
[Guest]: saw value in what I was doing.
[Guest]: And so I thought, well, you know, let me not do, let me, so I didn't have enough self-belief
[Guest]: to, to continue it.
[Guest]: And then as I was saying, I encountered economic history on the great gender divergence, how
[Guest]: the West became rich.
[Guest]: And I, I loved this for the big comparative questions, you know, striking at the heart
[Guest]: of the differences in our global society, and also using interdisciplinary methods.
[Guest]: So drawing on also economics and understanding geography, so drawing or marshalling every
[Guest]: method to work out what's going on.
[Guest]: And so I really loved that.
[Guest]: And so that's how I came to look at the great gender divergence.
[Guest]: Now in terms of my methodology, when I start a new region, first of all, I remember when
[Guest]: I started studying South Asia or the Middle East, I mean, I was totally overwhelmed, you
[Guest]: know, I'm a total outsider, right?
[Guest]: I know Zambia and Cambodia, what did I know about India?
[Guest]: And that's incredibly overwhelming.
[Guest]: And I, and I accept, you know, it may seem mad that I even embarked on trying to understand
[Guest]: the history of gender in India.
[Guest]: I mean, to be clear, no one has written a history of gender, or an explanation of how
[Guest]: countries became so patriarchal in any one country.
[Guest]: So I'm trying to do in every single country, what has not been done as an explanation of
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And how I do that is one, first of all, start with some broad overview history.
[Guest]: So let me understand South Asian history, or let me understand history in Morocco.
[Guest]: And then I piece together that jigsaw.
[Guest]: So I go further back, I look at population movements by looking at genetic data of who
[Guest]: moved in where, I look at archaeology, I read histories from medieval period, I read more
[Guest]: recent studies from economics, sociology, anthropology.
[Guest]: So all this time, I'm always piecing together little different parts of the jigsaw, definitely
[Guest]: learning from all these disciplines, and iteratively building.
[Guest]: So I think one difference that distinguishes my methodology from some of the big books
[Guest]: on the rise of the Westwood, they often have their theory.
[Guest]: But it's not necessarily developed from the ground up.
[Guest]: What I'm really trying to do is study every single society and not go in with any priors,
[Guest]: not go in with any priors at all, but try to assemble it from the bottom up.
[Guest]: So we can use big studies in economics, for example, there's a famous paper by Alessina
[Guest]: and others, showing that countries that had a history of the plough, typically have lower
[Guest]: female labor force participation.
[Guest]: And then we can try to use anthropology to trace changes over time to understand or archaeology
[Guest]: or sociology to understand why that might be important and to do when you study each
[Guest]: society in depth, you can try to understand why might the plough be associated with lower
[Guest]: female labor force participation.
[Guest]: So it's all a sort of, it's an act of assembly, it's an act of working with a 4D jigsaw that's
[Guest]: continually in flux, and everything should be up for grabs.
[Guest]: And this goes back to my philosophical training that there are no sacred truths that I should
[Guest]: be questioning everything, and that I should be rigorously interrogating things.
[Guest]: So for example, yeah, so there are many, there are many beliefs that I now hold that I didn't
[Guest]: go in with.
[Guest]: So for example, as a very secular atheist nihilist, you know, sort of left leaning,
[Guest]: my prior was not that, you know, Christianity was some great force for the world, right?
[Guest]: That's a position that would be taken by a centre-right who I definitely do not agree
[Guest]: with.
[Guest]: And so one of the arguments is that it was the Christian church that promoted the European
[Guest]: marriage pattern, that is nuclear families, and that might, and it's the church that meant
[Guest]: the church that Europe has these nuclear families, I was so opposed to that idea, I really did
[Guest]: not want to accept the idea that there was something good in Christianity.
[Guest]: You know, there are so many patriarchal aspects to the Christianity, and I associated it with
[Guest]: the right that I just didn't like.
[Guest]: And so I, and so I really studied all the literature on medieval Europe, I considered
[Guest]: all the different hypotheses, I looked at the evidence.
[Guest]: And then I think one thing that really changed it for me, I was reading this book, fantastic
[Guest]: book called Ties That Bind by Barbara Hanawalt.
[Guest]: And she looks at coroner's reports from before the Black Death.
[Guest]: So in the 11th century, and what she finds is that even before the Black Death, these
[Guest]: peasant families in England were cooperating outside their kinship group, they lived in
[Guest]: nuclear families, women were working, and she shows that the nuclear family existed
[Guest]: long before the Black Death.
[Guest]: So it can, so the other geographical theories that the Black Death led to a far deeper labour
[Guest]: market, and it was that those jobs in service that enabled people to live apart from their
[Guest]: families and that broke down these kinship groups.
[Guest]: But she's showing actually, all this existed long before the Black Death.
[Guest]: And she also found that people were refusing cousin marriage, they were refusing, they
[Guest]: were abiding by many, many of the prescriptions of the church.
[Guest]: And so I realized, and she doesn't use her book to relate to the nuclear family pattern,
[Guest]: but I realized that actually, the church was incredibly draconian, the church was interfering
[Guest]: in people's private lives.
[Guest]: And I realized that nobles were leveraging those incest prohibitions in order to stop
[Guest]: their rivals for consolidating wealth.
[Guest]: And so against my own priors, against what I consider to be my better judgment, I increasingly
[Guest]: realized that there was an important role for the church in that they stamped out cousin
[Guest]: marriage.
[Guest]: And then as a result of that, couples were expected to form nuclear households, and you
[Guest]: could only form a nuclear household when you'd acquired sufficient resources.
[Guest]: And that meant that both men and women often worked in service on very, very low wages.
[Guest]: And that meant a rather late age of marriage, because you had to acquire enough wealth before
[Guest]: marrying.
[Guest]: And then women continued to work after marriage in medieval Europe.
[Guest]: And as a result of that, husbands and wives often cooperated.
[Guest]: Now that's not to say that Europe was gender equal, far from it, it was incredibly patriarchal,
[Guest]: men dominated the judiciary, the courts, the medicine, health, parliament, etc, religion.
[Guest]: But at least there was that, that at least women were working.
[Guest]: And so there are so many things that I've been, it's really this continually testing
[Guest]: my hypotheses, that sort of, and you know, studying all sorts of bits together that's
[Guest]: helped me work out what's going on.
[Guest]: And the comparative aspect is really helpful too.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And that seems almost radical, given the context of academia, like one lamin that historians
[Amit Varma]: who've been on the show have, is that within academic history, you're always expected to
[Amit Varma]: have some lens or the other, right?
[Amit Varma]: So you'd imagine that what is history, history is you're talking about what happened.
[Amit Varma]: But actually, you look at academic history, and there'll be Marxist historians who'll
[Amit Varma]: always have that specific lens, and they'll apply that to everything.
[Amit Varma]: And within all the humanities, you know, it becomes, you know, as much a propagation of
[Amit Varma]: a particular political ideology as much as it is a pursuit of truth.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the approach that, you know, you've taken with this book is that I will
[Amit Varma]: have no priors, and I will just, you know, bring in frames from everywhere to look at
[Amit Varma]: this seems almost radical and also brave.
[Amit Varma]: So what's sort of been the reaction from within academia, for example, for something like
[Amit Varma]: this?
[Amit Varma]: So like, this is a big book, Princeton has commissioned it, it's a huge project, you
[Amit Varma]: know, do you get pushback from your academic peers and colleagues and so on and so forth?
[Amit Varma]: And is there jealousy, how does all of that play itself out?
[Guest]: Let me say two things.
[Guest]: I think that academics often talk about positionality, that our background experiences will shape
[Guest]: the kinds of questions and research we pursue.
[Guest]: And maybe listening to this podcast, some people might think, oh, she had an abusive
[Guest]: partner, she had an abusive father, she was born without a vagina, of course, she ends
[Guest]: up studying gender.
[Guest]: And I would like to say two things.
[Guest]: Number one, none of those experiences led me to gender, it was actually just because
[Guest]: I knew the supervisor who was studying the Gambia.
[Guest]: Secondly, I think my background experiences made me, I think through overcoming adversity
[Guest]: and iteratively travelling the world gave me the confidence and the ambition to take
[Guest]: on a big project.
[Guest]: But what I would hope and what I aspire to, is that anyone else who studied the exact
[Guest]: same question who looked at the same data would come to the same conclusion.
[Guest]: So it may be my background experiences that led me to take on this big project.
[Guest]: But I am, I think that there is an objective truth, which others could also reach out.
[Guest]: And if I get something wrong, they should correct me.
[Guest]: So that's my point about background positionality.
[Guest]: So I don't, I'm, you know, all my research is going to be influenced by my priors, but
[Guest]: I should try to challenge them and read work that challenges them.
[Guest]: I also need to be careful about how I present my research, because to some, for example,
[Guest]: it might be seen like I'm, I might be seen in various ways.
[Guest]: So for example, when I talk about economic growth, my, I need to be quite emphatic that
[Guest]: my point is, that my points are twofold.
[Guest]: One is on job creating economic growth, not worshipping GDP in itself.
[Guest]: And two, that job creation enables female solidarity, and the real point is this friendship
[Guest]: and exposure and questioning and challenging.
[Guest]: And I need to make that clear, because if I'm not sufficiently nuanced, someone might
[Guest]: think Alice is this neoliberal defending GDP, for example.
[Guest]: So it's partly about how I phrase and present my research.
[Guest]: I think that's important.
[Guest]: Yeah, I, I, it's difficult to know at that, at this stage, how everyone feels about it.
[Guest]: I'm sure there is some resistance, I mean, in some groups might not like the point of
[Guest]: regional comparisons.
[Guest]: You know, gender research is often very specific about a very specific place.
[Guest]: Some people don't even like the idea that I'm doing big regional comparisons.
[Guest]: So anyone who knows India will say, well, there's huge heterogeneity within India.
[Guest]: And that's absolutely true, but across India as a whole, men represent 89% of its leaders,
[Guest]: of its political representatives.
[Guest]: Across India as a whole, pretty much every state has a female labour force participation
[Guest]: rate and certainly an urban female labour force participation rate of below 20%.
[Guest]: So although there's this heterogeneity, and that's well below the global average in terms
[Guest]: of both female employment and political representation.
[Guest]: So for example, if you look at the World Economic Forum Gender Gap Index, where they look at
[Guest]: these different objective nationally representative data on gender inequality, we do see that
[Guest]: North Africa, the Middle East and South Asia are different from the global average.
[Guest]: So some people, but some people would see my analysis as far too sweeping by ignoring
[Guest]: that heterogeneity in it.
[Guest]: So I think, so there are some people who have reservations with even asking the question
[Guest]: that I'm asking, for sure, for sure.
[Guest]: And that's okay.
[Guest]: We all ask different questions.
[Guest]: And I can, you know, let a thousand flowers bloom, let other people do their own research.
[Guest]: But I think this is important and let me try for all those who are interested.
[Amit Varma]: Let a thousand flowers bloom, indeed.
[Amit Varma]: Let's sort of get to the topic at hand.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the essays I like the most is one that's titled 10,000 Years of Patriarchy Updated,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: And it's such a sweeping look at, as the title suggests, the broad history, you know, what
[Amit Varma]: is patriarchy?
[Amit Varma]: Where did it come from?
[Amit Varma]: What are the different factors that led to its rise?
[Amit Varma]: And before we actually get to that final sort of meta question, which is that, were there
[Amit Varma]: any role models you had in terms of either researchers or writers who have attempted
[Amit Varma]: similar things in different fields, obviously, not this one, like within, for example, popular
[Unknown]: nonfiction, you have people like Jared Diamond, who wrote his books on, you know, why countries
[Amit Varma]: turn out the way they do, the importance of geography, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: There's Paul Collier, who's also looked at why nations have developed the way they have.
[Amit Varma]: Were there models you have where you said that, yes, this person is great, they're bringing
[Amit Varma]: this frame and that frame, and there's something new happening here?
[Amit Varma]: Who were your influences in that sense?
[Guest]: That's a great question.
[Guest]: I think in terms of introducing me to economic history, Pseudo Erasmus, who's an economic
[Guest]: historian blogger, he was enormously influential, and the rigor through which he looks at different
[Guest]: theories and exploring evidence, that was hugely influential.
[Guest]: I also have a really great friend who's really supported me, and I share many of my hypotheses
[Guest]: with him, Professor Daron Adjemoglu at MIT, and he's written a number of big books.
[Guest]: I don't have so many friends with whom I can discuss my research, but he's one person who's
[Guest]: really supported me, and I share ideas, and we talk about it a lot together, so he's really
[Guest]: supported me.
[Guest]: I think that, yeah, there are a number, I mean, you mentioned all those big names, those
[Guest]: big books, those big sweeping books were great and fascinating, all of those were written
[Guest]: by men, all of those big ambitious books were written by men.
[Guest]: Men tend to be much more focused, much more specific, and among those, I would highlight
[Guest]: the work of Professor Naila Kabir.
[Guest]: She's a brilliant scholar.
[Guest]: So there are many scholars, also Professor Sylvia Chant, my supervisor.
[Guest]: So there are many, many brilliant scholarship.
[Guest]: Also another person who I have greatly admired, and her insights are hugely important, Professor
[Guest]: Claudia Golden, an economist at Harvard, and by analyzing the US labor market, she drew
[Guest]: the importance of tightening labor demand, that initially firms would impose marriage
[Guest]: bars, that women had to lose their jobs when they got married, but when demand tightened,
[Guest]: when firms and factories needed women, they abandoned these marriage bars.
[Guest]: And I see that, and I've seen that pattern repeated across the world, that when you have
[Guest]: tight labor markets, then firms increasingly want to hire women, and we can talk about
[Guest]: that in the case of Taiwan.
[Guest]: So there are so many scholars whose work has greatly enriched me, greatly enriched my understanding
[Guest]: and improved my analysis, and it really is a collective project.
[Guest]: It really is a collective project of me learning from other people, and I'm always very, very
[Guest]: grateful when people message me again on Twitter, sharing their papers, sharing their research,
[Guest]: because that really, yeah, that really helps me.
[Guest]: It's absolutely, you know, improving our knowledge is absolutely a collective project.
[Guest]: I don't want to give the impression that I think I'm this one maverick going at it by
[Guest]: myself or alone.
[Guest]: It's very much through learning from other people's brilliant research.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about the history of gender now, and you've written about three major waves
[Amit Varma]: of patriarchalism, as it were.
[Unknown]: Why do you academics use such big words?
[Unknown]: It makes it so difficult for me.
[Unknown]: What's a better word?
[Amit Varma]: I can't think of a better word for this.
[Amit Varma]: Three major waves of, I mean, I'd just break it up, you know, male domination or something
[Unknown]: of that sort.
[Unknown]: Patriarchy.
[Unknown]: Patriarchy is fine.
[Unknown]: Actually, patriarchy is better than patriarchalism.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I'm just kidding.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, it's fine.
[Unknown]: I'm just pulling your leg.
[Amit Varma]: So you can't offend me.
[Amit Varma]: That's great, because that's what I tell people about me as well, that you can't offend me,
[Unknown]: but sadly.
[Unknown]: You really can't.
[Unknown]: I mean, there's nothing you could say that would offend me.
[Amit Varma]: OK, I'm not even going to try to test that.
[Amit Varma]: So, yeah, I'm not interested in offending others either, but no doubt others will test
[Amit Varma]: it out.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a broad sweep version of how patriarchy grows everywhere in the world.
[Amit Varma]: What are the factors that bring it about?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, what are the traditional kind of explanations?
[Amit Varma]: And I know you've, you know, come up with seven explanations.
[Amit Varma]: I'm from, you know, I'm familiar with two or three of them.
[Amit Varma]: I knew the evolutionary one pretty well because I knew all of that literature.
[Amit Varma]: But what you've sort of done is that you've synthesized all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And this is, you know, beautiful sweeping narrative, which takes us all the way through
[Amit Varma]: 10,000 years to the present day.
[Amit Varma]: So let's start at the very beginning, as it were.
[Unknown]: I'm ready.
[Amit Varma]: Are you ready for this?
[Guest]: I'm ready for this.
[Guest]: Hardcore patriarchy.
[Guest]: OK.
[Guest]: So for the 100,000 years in which we are hunter gatherers, the evidence is pretty threadbare
[Guest]: because, you know, they didn't leave that much stuff.
[Guest]: But I think if we look, if contemporary studies of foragers and hunter gatherers over the
[Guest]: past 200,000 years, over the past 200 years or any guide, usually women in forager economies
[Guest]: are not secluded, though I don't think we should expect any kind of feminist utopia.
[Guest]: Women may still be beaten, raped, forced into polygamous and arranged marriage.
[Guest]: I think the real step changes, the three major drives of patriarchy were the plough, nomadic
[Guest]: pastoralism and male dominated religions.
[Guest]: So the Neolithic revolution, the advent of agriculture did not enormous, did not necessarily
[Guest]: entail patriarchy.
[Guest]: So if we look at cattle hayuk in Turkey, we see that men and women appear to have lived
[Guest]: very similar lives.
[Guest]: So bones and burials suggest no difference in stature, status or how they spend their
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: We've seen like equal amounts of soot on both men and women, suggesting they spent similar
[Guest]: time indoors.
[Guest]: Similarly, if we look at Bronze Age Thailand, we don't see big differences in graves.
[Guest]: Likewise, ancient Egypt, women had equal rights under law.
[Guest]: They weren't veiled.
[Guest]: Women were priestesses to the cults of goddesses.
[Guest]: Women, women were managers in workshops, especially in the Old Kingdom.
[Guest]: So women exercised status and had equal rights under the law.
[Guest]: The major step change is one, the advent of the plough, irrigation and the advent of cereals.
[Guest]: Now what I think occurred is that this raised the value of land because this increased crop
[Guest]: yields.
[Guest]: Now suddenly land became an important resource that could be inherited and bequeathed down
[Guest]: the generations.
[Guest]: Now a man who inherits land is able to attract or otherwise conquer many wives and concubines.
[Guest]: So once you have inherited wealth, there's a selective advantage for patrilineal.
[Guest]: That land can also become under threat because other people might want to raid and attack
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: So groups will be more likely to survive and flourish if they're what we call patrilocal,
[Guest]: if men band together with our cousins and uncles.
[Guest]: So that seems to encourage patrilocality.
[Guest]: So if you look at wherever there was a plough, irrigation, cereals, we tend to see the emergence
[Guest]: of patrilocality in which those tight knit clans cooperate and share honour collectively.
[Guest]: Now another important process is nomadic pastoralism.
[Guest]: So 5,000 years ago, these gangs of young men erupted out of the Pontic steppes, so that's
[Guest]: across Eurasia, and they were calling each other names of wolves and dogs.
[Guest]: And if we look at the genetic data, we see that indigenous men were slaughtered and the
[Guest]: steppe pastoralists raped or otherwise reproduced with women.
[Guest]: And so from Spain to Korea, the male line harks back to the steppe, and what they did
[Guest]: is institutionalise male dominance.
[Guest]: So from both pastoralism and the introduction of the plough heightened, so we see patrilocality
[Guest]: and patrilineal.
[Guest]: Now as those societies expanded, as they flourished, as they became more socially, economically
[Guest]: complex, getting to a population of 40,000 or 100,000, we also see, with the emergence
[Guest]: of city-states, we also see the emergence of moralising supernatural punishment, religions.
[Guest]: And there's been debates in academia where people are like, well, is it that socio-economic
[Guest]: complexity led to religion, or was it vice versa, or is there a co-evolutionary process?
[Guest]: And I think my general understanding of the literature is by religions often promoted
[Guest]: social cooperation, like thou shall not kill, you know, there are a bunch of things that
[Guest]: make people get along with each other.
[Guest]: If you believe there's eternal damnation for not doing it, you're sort of a bit nicer to
[Guest]: your neighbour.
[Guest]: What some of that literature overlooks is another important driver of cooperation.
[Guest]: So many of these religions, the Abrahamic religions across Eurasia, out-promoted female
[Guest]: chastity, sexual segregation, veiling, virginity tests, keeping men and women apart.
[Guest]: And I think that could be an important part of social cooperation and state expansion
[Guest]: because it would have mitigated male sexual jealousy, or even female sexual jealousy.
[Guest]: By keeping the sexes apart, people will be less jealous of other men, less likely to
[Guest]: result in conflict.
[Guest]: And so I think that patriarchy actually could have been, in inverted commas, good for social
[Guest]: flourishing and cooperation.
[Guest]: In addition to that, many of these ancient rulers often claimed divine authority.
[Guest]: So in southern Mesopotamia, in Song China, in Herod, for example, they often claimed
[Guest]: that we're backed up, the rulers claimed that they were backed up by God.
[Guest]: Now if you're backed up by God, if God is with you, how on earth do you explain floods,
[Guest]: disasters and famines?
[Guest]: They blame disobedient women.
[Guest]: So in 13th century, Mamluk Sultan Basbari, he blamed food price, food price hikes and
[Guest]: floods and the rising bread prices on disobedient women and banished them from the city streets.
[Guest]: So we do see the co-evolutionary process of male dominated societies, social expansion,
[Guest]: and also these prescriptive social codes.
[Guest]: And that's repeated across Eurasia.
[Guest]: However, that process of cultural evolution was mediated by geography.
[Guest]: So the plough, nomadic pastoralism could not spread in places where you have oceans, parasites
[Guest]: or mountains.
[Guest]: In those places like Southeast Asia, the Andes, the Gulf of Guinea, land never gained value.
[Guest]: So in the Andes, the biggest animal was the llama.
[Guest]: Like what can you plough with a llama?
[Guest]: It's not much bigger than me.
[Guest]: And so in those communities, land was not high value.
[Guest]: So we don't see the patrilineal inheritance of wealth.
[Guest]: Women were never tightly policed.
[Guest]: There were no strict restrictions on female chastity or ideals of female virginity.
[Guest]: Women continue to move freely and maintain their own social networks and political hierarchies,
[Guest]: valorize women in folklore that recognize their authority.
[Guest]: And they continue to contest men's attempts to check their authority and autonomy.
[Guest]: So that's the broad story.
[Guest]: So it's about the plough, pastoralism, male dominated religions spreading to places where
[Guest]: possible or otherwise limited by geography.
[Guest]: That's the sort of nutshell.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And it's fascinating because we always assume that progress happens in one dimension, right?
[Amit Varma]: And as you point out, you know, that's not the like just the Minoans and the Etruscans,
[Amit Varma]: for example, you know, you point out that, you know, they of course predated the ancient
[Amit Varma]: Greeks and the Romans and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And they were chill.
[Amit Varma]: They were far more gender equal.
[Amit Varma]: It wasn't like heaven on earth or something, but they were far more gender equal.
[Amit Varma]: Women had a much better time and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But then the invasions happened by the pastoral, the nomadic pastoralists.
[Amit Varma]: I was about to say the pastoral nomadists, but whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And everything kind of changes.
[Amit Varma]: You also, I love this quote where you have from Mesopotamia, where you quote Uruk-Agina,
[Amit Varma]: who is the king of Lagash in 2400 BC, who says, quote, the woman who has sinned by saying
[Amit Varma]: something to a man which she should not have said must have her teeth crushed with burnt
[Amit Varma]: bricks, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And again, the whole pattern of controlling female sexuality, you know, where you write,
[Amit Varma]: quote, I suggest that controlling female sexuality reduced male jealousy, enabled social cooperation
[Amit Varma]: and flourishing commerce.
[Amit Varma]: This long predated Islam, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: The point being that toxic as it was, there's a particular reason, an instrumental reason
[Amit Varma]: why it came about at that particular time and why it spread.
[Amit Varma]: Let's sort of talk about India, and I've done a couple of episodes, which kind of touch
[Amit Varma]: on that early history.
[Amit Varma]: I've done an episode with Tony Joseph, who wrote the great book, Early Indians, and with
[Amit Varma]: Peggy Mohan, who essentially, again, looked at that early period, but through the prism
[Amit Varma]: of languages.
[Amit Varma]: So, whereas, you know, Tony looked at what genes can reveal about where we came from
[Amit Varma]: and who we are.
[Amit Varma]: Peggy looked at languages and it was incredibly fascinating because, you know, the Aryan migration,
[Amit Varma]: as it were, happened around 4000 years ago, right?
[Amit Varma]: And they come out here and the way Peggy describes it is exactly as you write about nomadic pastoralist
[Amit Varma]: that it's troops of men just coming, marrying local women.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting because they have different languages at the start and those
[Amit Varma]: different languages persist through generations.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a fascinating narrative there.
[Amit Varma]: But the revelation there and the turning point comes around 2000 years ago.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a great quote by David Reich, where he talks about populations.
[Amit Varma]: And he says that if you're looking for a large population, look at the Han Chinese, but in
[Amit Varma]: India, you won't find large populations, you'll just find many, many, many, many small populations.
[Amit Varma]: What he means by that is endogamy, where somehow 2000 years ago, and before that they partied
[Amit Varma]: for 2000 years before that, after the Aryans came, everybody was mingling with everybody
[Amit Varma]: else.
[Amit Varma]: So a particular ideological or political strand kind of won over and you had caste and endogamy.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you have sort of the India that we have today.
[Amit Varma]: And that caste endogamy, obviously, then has this preference for female seclusion, as you
[Amit Varma]: put it.
[Amit Varma]: Because once you have this situation where everybody from any other caste is a threat
[Amit Varma]: to your property, a threat to your women, so to say, then, you know, that increases
[Amit Varma]: the incentives for keeping the women locked up at home for policing them for policing
[Amit Varma]: their sexuality.
[Amit Varma]: And it kind of gets worse and worse.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a worse problem in South Asia and in India than in other parts of the world,
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, that drive to female seclusion is not so high.
[Amit Varma]: And you also talk about how this is further exacerbated in North India, as compared to
[Amit Varma]: South India, when you have the constant invasions by, you know, Turkic Muslim empires, or the
[Amit Varma]: Mughals as we would call them.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, they come in bringing Islam and Islam is again, a male dominated sort
[Amit Varma]: of religion.
[Amit Varma]: They have their own regressive traditions like purdah and all of that, which for various
[Amit Varma]: reasons, you know, it just exacerbates what is already happening out here.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a little sense on how we can look at India in the light of all this broad sweep,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I'd ask you to then turn your attention to India and sort of tell me a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about this, because obviously very heterogeneous, a lot of local variations, there is so much
[Amit Varma]: shit happening out there, you cannot generalise, all that is fair.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you know, looking at it broadly can also make a lot of things clearer.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, and again, I'm sure many of your listeners are more knowledgeable on this than I am,
[Guest]: and they should correct me.
[Guest]: So absolutely, yes, we know from the genetic data that caste has existed for at least 2000
[Guest]: years, and that tight endogamy is only possible by strictly restricting women's mobility.
[Guest]: So of course, women were used, women did participate in farm work, but that's within your, on your
[Guest]: own farms.
[Guest]: And so you can limit their contact with outsiders.
[Guest]: Whereas when people gained wealth, women might retreat to the family courtyard.
[Guest]: On top of that, I think another really important point is that there was ancestral pastoralism
[Guest]: in Northwest India.
[Guest]: Now ancestral pastoralism, as we know from work by Anke Becker, and also Nathan Nunn
[Guest]: and others, is that this is typically associated with higher rates of female seclusion, and
[Guest]: greater idealisation of male honour and violence.
[Guest]: And I think a part of that is, if you have agriculture, cereal cultivation, then the
[Guest]: harvest can be easily taxed and appropriated and stored, and that can enable the formation
[Guest]: of states and rule of law and imposition of rule of law.
[Guest]: Whereas pastoralists can always easily evade the rule of law.
[Guest]: And so that condition of anarchy can itself cultivate macho men, because you need to act
[Guest]: just super tough so that no one dares fuck with you, right?
[Guest]: You need to seem so tough, so violent, they need to anticipate that if they come to you,
[Guest]: you will destroy their entire clan.
[Guest]: So that itself may cultivate this ideology of clan sharing honour collectively, and protecting
[Guest]: female clan.
[Guest]: And it's especially a wonderful book on medieval Rajasthan, looks at how, you know, when one
[Guest]: dominant group would take over another, they would often raid and take their women.
[Guest]: And it was a way of humiliating their opponent and demonstrating one's mastery.
[Guest]: And still today in Rajput weddings, for example, they take this, and I forget the precise term,
[Guest]: but it's like a long silver sword type pole that they used to hit the banner that would
[Guest]: go over the front of the house.
[Guest]: And it's a way, and also in North India, there tends to be the bride givers have the subservient
[Guest]: status.
[Guest]: And I think that goes back to this history of the conquering clan, seizing the women
[Guest]: from the others and using them as concubines, sex slaves, etc.
[Guest]: So in that history, where we have caste endogamy, where we have ideals of purity and female
[Guest]: seclusion, where male honour is contingent on female chastity.
[Guest]: And that condition of conquest, then in came, one raids and slavery and taking our women,
[Guest]: and that's an assault on male honour.
[Guest]: And I think that may have exacerbated, that may have politicised religion.
[Guest]: So still today, if you look at Pew data, their religion, people are much more religious in
[Guest]: North India than the South, it's like 88% in the North, 35% in the South.
[Guest]: There's also far greater opposition to inter-religious marriage in the North.
[Guest]: And again, that may stem from this history of not wanting another community to take our
[Guest]: women.
[Guest]: And again, it's a sense of social policing, these are our women.
[Guest]: Also, I think a really important point when we talk about Islam is to understand the cultural
[Guest]: evolution of Islam, because this isn't about the Quran per se.
[Guest]: Now the Quran per se has many egalitarian aspects addressing both men and women.
[Guest]: Actually there was a step change in the 12th century when Iraq became the seat of the Sunni
[Guest]: Muslim Empire and those rulers gained legitimacy through their close alliance with Persian
[Guest]: theologians and Amit Kuru in his wonderful book calls this the Ulema state alliance.
[Guest]: And as we were already discussing, Southern Mesopotamia was one of the most patriarchal
[Guest]: places in the world.
[Guest]: So now you have those Persian theologians, Tusi, Devani, Ghazali, they are empowered
[Guest]: and emboldened to run these madrasas.
[Guest]: And then those Persian texts, Udu texts, came to influence those Mughal courts.
[Guest]: So I don't want us to say that we're talking about Islam in its original state.
[Guest]: This is a process of cultural evolution influenced by some of those Persian ideas.
[Guest]: And there were some aspects of the way that the influence of Arab tribes shaped the cultural
[Guest]: evolution of Islam.
[Guest]: So for example, to avoid the Jizya head tax, people had to learn the Quran, over in the
[Guest]: Middle East had to gain an Arab patron and that fostered cousin marriage, because women
[Guest]: under Islam, married women can own and maintain their own property.
[Guest]: And that cultivated cousin marriage because people wanted to keep wealth in the family.
[Guest]: So you see these strong kinship groups, these Persian theologians like Ghazali, and I'd
[Guest]: recommend this wonderful book by Zahra Ayubi called Gendered Morality.
[Guest]: She talks about how Ghazali and others promoted this idea that men are intellectually superior,
[Guest]: men are uniquely capable of reason, and they gain piety by preventing fitna, that is moral
[Guest]: corruption.
[Guest]: So this isn't something in the Quran, this isn't something in Sharia law, and I want
[Guest]: to be very explicit about that.
[Guest]: So it's this cultural influence combined by slavery, which is exacerbated by history of
[Guest]: male honor being contingent on female chastity, that I think may heighten some of these controls.
[Guest]: But again, and I think that's part of the reason why women increasingly retreated into
[Guest]: the family courtyard, and as families gained wealth, women were kept closer to the home.
[Guest]: But all of this is also subject to flux and change.
[Guest]: So I think that's my broad understanding of why North India generally tends to have higher
[Guest]: rates of seclusion.
[Guest]: So for example, if we look at Rajasthan, the rural rate of female labor force participation
[Guest]: is 40%.
[Guest]: But in urban areas, in towns and cities, it's 13%.
[Guest]: And I think this is what I call the honor income trade off, in that families are perfectly
[Guest]: happy for women to work in the fields because they're not mixing and mingling with outsiders.
[Guest]: But in urban areas, families might be much more reluctant for women to be mixing and
[Guest]: mingling in the streets, because then they could be mixing with outsiders.
[Guest]: And that is a risk to male honor.
[Guest]: So even though many women who I've spoken to in Rajasthan would like a job, it's principally
[Guest]: a government job, because that's a respectable position, and there's less threat of mixing
[Guest]: with outsiders.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit more about the honor income trade off, as you call it, because it's something
[Amit Varma]: that's, I mean, we'll come back to history later, where I want to know about the rest
[Amit Varma]: of the world as well, the way we've spoken about India over the last 2000 years, so to
[Amit Varma]: say.
[Amit Varma]: But the honor income trade off is something that seems especially to be a factor in India
[Unknown]: and an impediment to gender equality.
[Guest]: So tell me a bit about what that phrase means.
[Guest]: So the honor income trade off is, in societies where male honor is contingent upon female
[Guest]: chastity, then female labor supply only rises when female earnings are sufficiently high
[Guest]: to compensate for that loss of male honor.
[Guest]: And so that's precisely what we saw in East Asia.
[Guest]: So for example, Taiwan had incredibly labor-intensive growth, job-creating economic growth, smaller
[Guest]: medium enterprises from the 1980s really ran out of skilled labor.
[Guest]: They couldn't hire enough men, so they increasingly recruited women, and the gender pay gap increasingly
[Guest]: closed.
[Guest]: And Taiwan now today has a smaller gender pay gap than the USA.
[Guest]: Its legislature is 44% female, it has a twice-elected female president.
[Guest]: And that's partly as a result of the income compensating for the loss of male honor.
[Guest]: But let me nuance it a little for India, is that in Delhi today, not many people will
[Guest]: talk about honor, right?
[Guest]: That's not something that's so important, maybe in rural Rajasthan, but maybe not in
[Guest]: Delhi today.
[Guest]: But still, this history of male honor has profound repercussions for culture.
[Guest]: And so the more that, so caste endogamy and ideals of seclusion were maintained by keeping
[Guest]: women close to the home.
[Guest]: And as women stay at home, they come to, we come to see the cultural celebration of female
[Guest]: sacrifice for men, female sacrifice for men, and the ideal of male dominance.
[Guest]: And that's ritualized and celebrated through culture.
[Guest]: So the idea of women fasting for their husbands, the idea of women performing housework, feminist
[Guest]: economists and sociologists often talk about housework as it's a tax on women's time.
[Guest]: And this is an asymmetric tax and women are doing the lion's share of it and this is unfair
[Guest]: and we need to reduce those time costs.
[Guest]: And some people, for example, they look at data on India and they see that married women
[Guest]: are spending a huge amount of time on housework.
[Guest]: And they think that it's housework holding men back, holding women back rather.
[Guest]: And that's true.
[Guest]: But housework is also endogenous to our normative expectations.
[Guest]: And the underlying idea, or at least as I understand it, is women performing their subservience
[Guest]: to male dominance, that women doing things for men.
[Guest]: So mothers doing all this housework for their sons and revering their sons and, you know,
[Guest]: maybe treating their sons as small gods, right, or treating their husbands as small gods.
[Guest]: And that itself has important repercussions.
[Guest]: Because even if piped water supply, for example, would be able to reduce the absolute time
[Guest]: burden of housework, that improved infrastructure, that development doesn't change the underlying
[Guest]: cultural ideal that women are performing subservience to men.
[Guest]: And as long as that's happening, then that cultural mindset persists that women are doing
[Guest]: things for men.
[Guest]: And I think that culture has emerged through this valorization of, you know, and the number
[Guest]: of ways that culture persists.
[Guest]: So for example, as long as you have this institution of patrilocality, that a woman leaves her
[Guest]: household to join the groom's household, which, as I was saying, emerged through a number
[Guest]: of traditions, then women are socialized to accept subservience.
[Guest]: So for example, in my interviews with women, they talk about how one woman was saying how,
[Guest]: you know, her mother would say, don't be stubborn.
[Guest]: How on earth are you going to live with your in-laws?
[Guest]: How will they manage?
[Guest]: How will they?
[Guest]: Well, they won't keep you if you're like this.
[Guest]: So women are socialized.
[Guest]: And I'd really recommend the book Chup on this, is women socialized, not some women,
[Guest]: I should say, some women socialized not to have their own preferences, not to be independently
[Guest]: evaluating things.
[Guest]: Because if the expectation is that you have to leave to fit in with another household,
[Guest]: to be subservient under another family, then women are socialized to take up less space,
[Guest]: to adjust because they, because they're inculcated, some are inculcated with the fear that they
[Guest]: are then dependent on that family's support and favor.
[Guest]: And another important way in which this is institutionalized is through the mother-in-law
[Guest]: relationship.
[Guest]: And this is an important element of gender inequality that Anu Kriti has written about,
[Guest]: for example, is that, you know, in poor patrilineal societies where female employment is very
[Guest]: low and women lack economic independence, mother's prosperity and security is reliant
[Guest]: on their sons, right?
[Guest]: Women need sons to survive because the son is going to provide for her, to take care
[Guest]: of her.
[Guest]: So, you know, women have son preference and that's also encouraged through the cultural
[Guest]: idealization that men continue the family lineage.
[Guest]: But if a woman is economically dependent on her son, then she may resist and be resentful
[Guest]: and be jealous of this incoming wife who's claiming an alternative alliance because she
[Guest]: worries that that wife may destroy and fracture her relationship with her son and take him
[Guest]: away and then she'll be left all alone and isolated.
[Guest]: So that kind of female jealousy and animosity can lead to bullying and abuse between the
[Guest]: women.
[Guest]: For example, you were talking about marriage as a toxic institution or there are a number
[Guest]: of other institutions and relationships between women that can also perpetuate patriarchy
[Guest]: in a context of low female employment and dependence on men.
[Guest]: And there's a combination of the way that economic dependence builds on the cultural
[Unknown]: valorization of men, you know, men treated as a better example.
[Amit Varma]: And an unintended consequence of this, you know, this mother-in-law daughter-in-law battles
[Amit Varma]: also is a rash of terrible TV dramas, which we kind of suffered through in the aughties.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, not that I watched any of them, but it crowds out better content.
[Amit Varma]: But anyway, that is so one sort of common narrative about women's empowerment and you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned it in your book in the context of other places is that household tech is a big
[Amit Varma]: deal, right?
[Amit Varma]: Because once you have a washing machine, once you have a dishwasher, your tasks become much
[Amit Varma]: easier.
[Amit Varma]: You have much more time.
[Amit Varma]: But what you're saying is that it doesn't really matter so much that one of the one
[Amit Varma]: of the key reasons why a woman is doing all of those is to express a subservience to the
[Amit Varma]: man.
[Amit Varma]: And she's got to do that anyway, if not this way, then some other way.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't mean that if she has more time, she's necessarily going to go out and work.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, at least in India, it's not as much of a panacea as one would think.
[Guest]: Is that what you're saying?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So let me say two things.
[Guest]: One, demand for so there's a lot of literature showing, for example, there are several papers
[Guest]: in the USA that show the washing that suggests washing machines were engines of liberation.
[Guest]: They reduce women's time burdens, but actually, that demand for washing machines may have
[Guest]: been endogenous.
[Guest]: It may have been that there was job creating economic growth.
[Guest]: Women went out into the labor force and they were eager to pursue careers.
[Guest]: And then they wanted washing machines to reduce their time burdens so that it could be the
[Guest]: reverse relationship.
[Guest]: And in India, we do see that even though fertility has fallen, which should have reduced women's
[Guest]: time burdens, women remain laden with a number of domestic duties.
[Guest]: And I think this is and I think this reflects a global trend.
[Guest]: So if you look across national data, we see that in countries where the male breadwinner
[Guest]: ideal is widely endorsed, women perform a larger volume of housework.
[Guest]: So the actual volume of housework could actually stem from ideology and the child penalty,
[Guest]: that is the cost of having a child when you compare European countries, where people believe
[Guest]: that a mother should stay at home with their children, they do a lot.
[Guest]: Then you see a larger child penalty.
[Guest]: So the normative expectations that women should be performing this labor for men and for their
[Guest]: children could be shaping women's responsiveness to economic opportunities.
[Guest]: And so, for example, let me give a couple of examples that, you know, some rural families
[Guest]: might want women to make fresh chapatis twice a day, right?
[Guest]: The expectation or women should be preparing for Hindu festival and the absolute enormity
[Guest]: of that work, whether it's making Ladoo or other things, right, the enormity of the expectations
[Guest]: of all the things that mothers should do.
[Guest]: So there's a nice paper, and I'll forget the name and terribly offend people, that they
[Guest]: suggest that actually one reason that women might, educated women might even be limiting
[Guest]: their labor supply might be so they can support their children's education.
[Guest]: So prioritizing the family and putting their children first, putting their families first.
[Guest]: And yeah, so there are a number of things that the idealization of serving men may persist
[Guest]: and may increase the total burden of housework.
[Guest]: And it's not just about housework, but it's the idea that, it's that these cultural ideals
[Guest]: can persist alongside development.
[Amit Varma]: You know, just the thought of women making Ladoos for everyone, it's a kind of, it's
[Amit Varma]: a kind of sinister revenge, because sugar is poison, of course, so you're gradually
[Amit Varma]: killing your whole family by making them sweets, pat on the back to all the women who do that.
[Amit Varma]: And it reminds me of like Parkinson's law, which you could call the Parkinson's law for
[Amit Varma]: women because it applies so well, right?
[Amit Varma]: Work expands to fill the time available.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, your point being that it isn't enough if time saving technology comes along.
[Amit Varma]: The point is that, you know, there's something deeper at play here.
[Amit Varma]: And just going back to the honor income trade off, you know, where the honor side of the
[Unknown]: ledger is a bit weaker to begin with, for example, where there isn't such a preference
[Amit Varma]: for female seclusion, it's much easier for women to go out there and work, all you need
[Amit Varma]: is that the economic returns increase, and then it makes sense.
[Amit Varma]: But here it's not just about the economic returns increasing, that is one way.
[Amit Varma]: But the other way is, you know, as you've pointed out, if there are fewer concerns about
[Amit Varma]: the honor, for example, there's less of an obstacle to women working in businesses owned
[Unknown]: by other women, you've pointed out, because the assumption is that they're safer.
[Guest]: And I should, yes, so absolutely.
[Guest]: So when families are more confident that women's honor is protected, then they're generally
[Guest]: much more supportive of female employment.
[Guest]: And let me give you two examples.
[Guest]: So earlier, I was mentioned, Soumya Dhanaraj and Vidya Mahambe's research that they point
[Guest]: to family factories often assure rural families in Bihar that yes, we'll look after your daughters
[Guest]: by keeping them in these incredibly surveilled, you know, basically prisons, you know, we're
[Guest]: going to escort them to the market on the Sunday and return them back safely.
[Guest]: So factories redouble their efforts to control and monitor women to reassure the families
[Guest]: in Bihar so they can be assured of the labor supply.
[Guest]: And the same was true in East Asia.
[Guest]: I should also add, so absolutely, so when women's honor is secured, we do see generally
[Guest]: higher rates of female labor force participation.
[Guest]: Let me give one more example that I wanted to share that within India, 34% of people
[Guest]: say that male, 34% of women say that male violence is justified, that men can beat their
[Guest]: wives if she neglects the children or burns the food.
[Guest]: So never mind men doing zero care work, if a woman does that care work inadequately,
[Guest]: it's okay to beat her.
[Guest]: So this is what I'm talking about, the normative expectations of housework.
[Guest]: And again, going back to Soumya Dhanaraj and Vidya Mahamre, they show that in North India,
[Guest]: when women who work, they're much more likely to be beaten by their husbands.
[Guest]: So that in itself is another reason why women might be reluctant to step out.
[Guest]: I mean, what, it's not so great.
[Guest]: And Anu Kriti, whose work I was mentioning, she finds that in areas where you see higher
[Guest]: rates of female political representation as a result of quotas, you see higher rates of
[Guest]: gender based violence.
[Guest]: And there are parallels in Bangladesh, women who work in garment factories or microcredit
[Guest]: might be at higher risk of patriarchal backlash.
[Guest]: So in societies where male honour is paramount, where men want to demonstrate their mastery
[Guest]: over women, then they can respond negatively.
[Guest]: But I also wanted to say, let me share why actually, but the way that this can be overcome
[Guest]: is through job creating economic growth.
[Guest]: And I want to share some data from the UK.
[Guest]: So when Hindu Indian women come to the UK, they do work.
[Guest]: So in the UK, the rate of female labour force participation among white British women is
[Guest]: 74%.
[Guest]: Among Hindu Indians, it's 69%.
[Guest]: So when there are job creating economic opportunities, and when public safety is assured, women are
[Guest]: working.
[Guest]: I mean, and in India, in the UK today, Indian families are relatively wealthy and women
[Guest]: are thriving, you know, as accountants, in finance, in myriad fields, in accountancy,
[Guest]: many of our doctors are Indian women.
[Guest]: So I think that really shows the honour income trade off, that when honour can be ensured,
[Guest]: when their income returns are sufficiently high, so there's no fundamental, there's no
[Guest]: fundamental bottleneck, you know, culture isn't set in stone, it's this trade off that
[Guest]: I'm trying, that's what I want to communicate.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I was also sort of fascinated by two other data points that you bring to bear.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them is that Bangladesh is better in this respect, because there is lower endogamy
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: Oh, yeah.
[Guest]: So that's something I got wrong.
[Guest]: That's something I got wrong.
[Unknown]: That's something I changed my mind on.
[Unknown]: Yes.
[Unknown]: Excellent.
[Guest]: Tell me about it.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I, so I initially thought that, so right, so India has seen its rate of female labour
[Guest]: force participation plummet, while Bangladesh has seen its rate of female labour force participation
[Guest]: increase.
[Guest]: And I think that fact alone is fascinating and deserves more research.
[Guest]: Now why is this?
[Guest]: And some people say, well, it's garments.
[Guest]: But no, in a population of 160 million, garments are only employing 4 or 4.5 million.
[Guest]: So that's not it.
[Guest]: I also realised it's actually not culture.
[Guest]: It's not that Bangladeshis care less about honour.
[Guest]: If you look at early marriage, that's incredibly high in Bangladesh.
[Guest]: Early marriage indicates huge concern for female virginity.
[Guest]: We must marry our daughter early to preserve her virginity, to get to the right lineage.
[Guest]: If you, Bangladesh had a history of purdah, a history of female veiling, which indicates
[Guest]: a concern for female seclusion.
[Guest]: Also when Bangladeshis go to the UK, their rate of female labour market participation
[Guest]: is actually only 39%.
[Guest]: So faced with those exact same economic opportunities, they're much less likely to seize them.
[Guest]: The economic returns, the female employment are not high enough to compensate for male
[Guest]: honour.
[Guest]: Now, the Bangladeshi families also tend to be less educated and less wealthy than Indian
[Guest]: families and that itself might suppress female employment.
[Guest]: But even controlling for that, Muslim Bangladeshis, women are less likely to work.
[Guest]: So again, so it's not that Bangladesh is actually more gender equal.
[Guest]: What I suspect has gone on is, and this is going to sound controversial, and I need to
[Guest]: be careful about how I put this, over the past 50 years, there has been massive labour
[Guest]: repression in Bangladesh.
[Guest]: So trade unions were banned ever since the 1970s.
[Guest]: Successive governments co-opted trade unions and used patronage to control them and they
[Guest]: became fairly defunct and weak and useless and people lost faith in trade unions.
[Guest]: As a result of that weak activism, labour inspectorates were understaffed and fairly
[Guest]: ineffective.
[Guest]: They were even banned from export processing zones.
[Guest]: National legislation around labour rights does not apply in those places.
[Guest]: And that has enabled Bangladesh to, you know, compete on price for low end garment jobs.
[Guest]: But more than that, with very weak labour protections, with huge labour repression,
[Guest]: for example, in 2019, when there was a sporadic outburst of strikes, the police returned with
[Guest]: water cannons and rubber bullets and 50 people died.
[Guest]: So as a result of that labour repression, as a result of those weak labour protections,
[Guest]: it's not enormously costly to hire more formal labour.
[Guest]: So firms actually have a great economic incentive to hire more and more workers because it doesn't
[Guest]: come with so many burdens of protections for the worker, for the formal worker.
[Guest]: So Amit Basole over in Bangalore has a fantastic paper looking at the growth elasticity of
[Guest]: employment and he finds that in Bangladesh compared to India, we see that growth generates
[Guest]: more jobs.
[Guest]: It generates more non-agricultural jobs and it generates more formal jobs, whereas the
[Guest]: difference I think in India, and we could contrast West Bengal, for example, in West
[Guest]: Bengal, as you know, there's been the left front and leftist agitation since the 1970s.
[Guest]: And that raised the cost of labour relative to productivity.
[Guest]: And if labour is more costly than productivity, factories closed and we saw de-industrialisation.
[Guest]: That also occurred in Kerala in the 1970s.
[Guest]: So while many of us may think it's a great thing to have formal labour protections that
[Guest]: can actually protect a labour aristocracy while leading to the decimation of industry.
[Guest]: So in the 1970s, many biddy factories actually closed down.
[Guest]: They relocated to Tamil Nadu or they outsourced to home-based workers.
[Guest]: Those women are working at home under the control of patriarchal guardians.
[Guest]: So some of those labour protections, even though they're well intended, at least by
[Guest]: the labour aristocracy, may actually be suppressing job-creating economic growth, may actually
[Guest]: be compounding precarity.
[Guest]: So for example, just yesterday I interviewed a female entrepreneur who has a printing business
[Guest]: and she was saying that by staying small, she's actually able to avoid many of these
[Guest]: bureaucratic controls, bureaucratic controls and labour regulations.
[Guest]: So what she does has is a relatively small staff of formal workers and then she has an
[Guest]: additional dozen contract labourers.
[Guest]: So she keeps her formal workforce small in order to avoid some of the costs and that
[Guest]: enables her to be much more productive.
[Guest]: But there are major consequences and as a result, as our survey shows that 77% of Indians
[Guest]: continue to work in firms employing less than 10 people and that has barely changed.
[Guest]: And this has a number of consequences for gender relations.
[Guest]: First of all, if people remain in informal, unorganised, precarious labour, then they
[Guest]: remain incredibly precarious and there is very weak social security.
[Guest]: No one wants to end up in a government hospital where you could be waiting four days or poor
[Guest]: quality education or just the total lack of social security.
[Guest]: And so that means to protect themselves, to mitigate health shocks and economic shocks,
[Guest]: people cling closely to their caste and kinship networks, their jati, as shown by Munshi,
[Guest]: among others.
[Guest]: So that precarity tightens reliance on kin, that tightens the incentive, the economic
[Guest]: incentive for endogamy.
[Guest]: Now, of course, there are also cultural reasons, the ideals of purity, ideals that we should
[Guest]: marry within our own kin, but it's also the nature of India's economic development that's
[Guest]: reproducing some of those caste ideals.
[Guest]: So if we look at caste-based residential segregation, we see that that is weakening slightly in
[Guest]: thriving cities with more salaried employment.
[Guest]: We also see that people are more likely to live in nuclear homes if they live, if they
[Guest]: work for non-family businesses, if they have salaried employment.
[Guest]: So if they're economically independent, then they're more likely to go at it alone.
[Guest]: Whereas sons who think that they need to rely on their family business for inheritance,
[Guest]: for their economic security, may feel they have little option but to challenged ideals
[Guest]: of arranged marriages.
[Guest]: But of course, there's cultural content too, like, for example, in North India, and I believe
[Guest]: as a consequence of the history of close-knit clans banding together, the rate of joint
[Guest]: families is four times higher.
[Guest]: So there are cultural families, there are cultural factors, and the idea that people
[Guest]: should revere and respect their parents and wanting to please their parents, and so that
[Guest]: perpetuates arranged marriages.
[Guest]: But this is exacerbated and perpetuated by economic development.
[Guest]: So where you have precarity, that heightens reliance on kin, where you have a slow job
[Guest]: creating economic growth, women remain under the control of patriarchal guardians.
[Guest]: And it also suppresses economic opportunities.
[Guest]: For example, if Dalit women cannot do, if there are no jobs in town, then Dalit women
[Guest]: cannot escape the villages, so they remain under what Ambedkar referred to as what is
[Guest]: the village, but the den of nepotism and ignorance and communism and narrow mindedness.
[Guest]: So this job, so going back to your question, sorry, I should be more concise, is that the
[Guest]: nature of India's economic development, with one factor among many, maybe being the extent
[Guest]: of bureaucracy, the incentives for firms to stay small, and I should say, there could
[Guest]: also be cultural incentives for firms to stay small, you know, as long as people trust their
[Guest]: close knit kin, as long as people trust their family members, they may prefer just to stay
[Guest]: small among themselves.
[Guest]: But I don't think that can explain the Bangladeshi-India difference, because Bangladesh is also a close
[Guest]: knit community.
[Guest]: So to answer your question, why has female employment soared in Bangladesh, but not in
[Guest]: India?
[Guest]: I think, paradoxically, it might be labour repression, and labour protection, labour
[Guest]: repression and labour protection, rather than cultural factors.
[Guest]: I think that's the best way to explain it.
[Guest]: But as and this goes back, so and I really like that comparison.
[Guest]: I think that contrasting Bangladesh and India tells us actually more about India and about
[Guest]: its race, about what's going on.
[Guest]: So I find that intriguing.
[Guest]: And I would, yeah, I like that.
[Amit Varma]: You said at the start, this would, this, you know, borders on being a controversial explanation,
[Amit Varma]: and you just called it paradoxical.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't think it's either, because I think outside of left-leaning academia, it's well
[Amit Varma]: accepted that most labour laws and most labour regulation harm workers rather than help them.
[Amit Varma]: And we've seen that in India.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a classic example of that, frankly, it's just an extremely cogent explanation,
[Amit Varma]: which you just gave.
[Amit Varma]: I want to pick up on another strand that you went down on when you mentioned Soumya and
[Amit Varma]: Vidya's research.
[Amit Varma]: And they'd be so happy, of course, to hear the name so many times.
[Amit Varma]: But what you pointed out was how their research has shown that these factory workers, to alleviate
[Amit Varma]: concerns about are the female workers safe, will, you know, herd them into safe spaces
[Amit Varma]: and make sure they get back home, all right, and so on to fight some of that sort of urge
[Amit Varma]: for female seclusion, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And my question is about sort of those spaces where these women are together, about those
[Amit Varma]: spaces, not just in this context, but in any context where women talk to each other, they,
[Amit Varma]: you know, earlier, you'd spoken about the Cambodia case where, you know, these women
[Amit Varma]: are comparing notes and saying, oh, your husband helps out at home, mine doesn't.
[Amit Varma]: And there's some kind of solidarity and empowerment happening there.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something you've written pieces about, you've discussed on a podcast with
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, all of which are linked from the show notes, of course.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit more about this, because part of the puzzle of figuring out where you
[Amit Varma]: are, to begin with, and what is wrong with where you are, is just talking to others sort
[Amit Varma]: of broadening those horizons.
[Amit Varma]: And female friendships, therefore, play a huge part in female empowerment.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, before we get back to the historical geographic narrative, let's talk a little
[Guest]: bit more about that.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Shruti Mukherjee and others have found that in parts of Uttar Pradesh, 26% of women have
[Guest]: no friends outside the home.
[Guest]: And so their networks become limited.
[Guest]: Also, there's a nice study of West Bengal looking at who people make phone calls to.
[Guest]: And they find that women often make phone calls to their family or their husband's family.
[Guest]: Whereas men have much wider networks.
[Guest]: And if women are reliant and dependent on their husband's family, then they have narrow
[Guest]: social circles, then they're less aware of alternative ideologies, and they might not
[Guest]: necessarily have the support, the encouragement to transgress, to try new things.
[Guest]: And so I think friendships are important in two ways.
[Guest]: And it's also it's not just friends per se, but also a rich diversity of friends.
[Guest]: So it's JNU women coming together, meeting people from Bengal, meeting people from all
[Guest]: different parts of the country with different experiences and different ideologies.
[Guest]: Because women in the village may have friends, but they might be similarly marginalised women
[Guest]: with similarly economically dependent on their providers with little exit options.
[Guest]: And instead, they themselves may practice Islamophobia, casteism, colourism, for example.
[Guest]: So it's not just female friendships, but it's having this diverse networks with both economically
[Guest]: privileged people who might help you with resources, but also people with greater ideas
[Guest]: and exposure.
[Guest]: So friendships are important in two ways.
[Guest]: And in my analysis of gender, I try to differentiate between our internalised gender ideologies.
[Guest]: So that is what I privately think is right or wrong, but also our norm perceptions, my
[Guest]: perceptions of what is condemned or championed by others in my community.
[Guest]: So within my internalised ideologies, we might look at my self belief, whether I have confidence
[Guest]: in myself to speak out, whether I myself think women are more competent than men.
[Guest]: But even if I myself am privately critical, I may nonetheless comply with gender inequalities
[Guest]: and hierarchies, maybe because I'm not entirely confident in myself, or also because I anticipate
[Guest]: backlash, whereas, so yesterday, I was at JNU, and I was talking to these women how
[Guest]: they came to JNU, and they came to question all these patriarchal ideologies that women
[Guest]: shouldn't date, or that women shouldn't choose for themselves, or that women shouldn't wear
[Guest]: shorts or that women shouldn't do all these things, or that women should adhere to their
[Guest]: parents choices in marriage.
[Guest]: And it's friends, encouraging each other, emboldening each other.
[Guest]: So one girl had travelled internationally, so she was from a slightly more economically-privileged
[Guest]: background.
[Guest]: Another girl had not travelled at all, but she'd managed to get a scholarship to go to
[Guest]: a conference overseas.
[Guest]: And those two friends encourage each other, they say, go for it, go for it, you do it.
[Guest]: So even though families might be more conservative, even though families might be concerned for
[Guest]: their honour, these women are supporting each other, encouraging each other.
[Guest]: And it's these iterative transgressions.
[Guest]: So for example, when I was in Cambodia, girls would see that other girls down their street
[Guest]: were getting homework, and they were jealous.
[Guest]: They wanted homework too.
[Guest]: And so they were pushing their parents to take them to school and things like that.
[Guest]: So it's absolutely what, and I say, and many of the women I've also spoken to who might
[Guest]: be in abusive relationships and not recognising those harms.
[Guest]: So thinking, for example, of this, you know, controlling your jealous practices because
[Guest]: he loves me so much, for example.
[Guest]: But friends can help each other to see that critically, to question some of those ideologies.
[Guest]: So it's one about questioning, to question ideas, and two, to be supported, to be involved
[Guest]: in, to be encouraged, that's really transformative.
[Guest]: So this is why I say friendships are absolutely the foundation of both feminist consciousness
[Guest]: and feminist activism.
[Amit Varma]: One observation that I sometimes make is that, you know, India lives in sort of three centuries
[Amit Varma]: at the same time, right?
[Amit Varma]: So there's a 19th, 20th, 21st, right?
[Amit Varma]: The girls you encountered in JNU, regardless of background, are pretty much firmly in the
[Amit Varma]: 21st century, in that sense, where large parts of the country are in the 19th century.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's also something to keep in mind that it might seem to be the same
[Amit Varma]: geography, but within that geography, there are these overlapping realities, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, the drive to female seclusion would definitely be there, for example, from
[Amit Varma]: those still in the 19th and 20th centuries, and not really so much in the 21st century.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm struck by the distinction that you made between internalised ideologies and what
[Amit Varma]: the social norms are, like...
[Guest]: Or our norm perceptions, our perceptions of what...
[Guest]: Because as Timur Kuran has highlighted, there can also be pluralistic ignorance.
[Guest]: So we may underestimate wider support for disobedience and rebellion, and that itself
[Guest]: can create a negative feedback loop, or what I call a despondency trap.
[Guest]: So it may be that many other people are privately critical, but as long as they anticipate social
[Guest]: disapproval, they won't actually stick their necks out and voice their concerns.
[Guest]: And so that in itself traps people from thinking differently, which is like my vagina example.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I like Timur Kuran's term, preference falsification, where, I mean, the whole idea
[Amit Varma]: is that you feel a certain way, which is your internalised ideology, but you perceive the
[Amit Varma]: norm to be something else, and therefore you don't express yourself until eventually there
[Amit Varma]: is what he calls a preference cascade, and then people feel emboldened to express themselves.
[Amit Varma]: Now, classic example to go back to the Cambodia case would be that, you know, you could have
[Amit Varma]: a woman who believes that it is a wife's job to do all the work at home, but then she meets
[Amit Varma]: friends and her internalised ideology changes.
[Amit Varma]: She thinks that, no, men should also share in it, right?
[Amit Varma]: But she perceives a norm to be so patriarchal that she dare not question it, so she doesn't.
[Amit Varma]: But here there's a sort of a third factor besides these female friendships, which kind
[Amit Varma]: of comes into play, which is the way technology spreads a sort of globalised culture, where
[Amit Varma]: you could be watching things on Netflix or Hotstar or whatever, where men are actually
[Amit Varma]: cooking, where women are actually working outside.
[Amit Varma]: So is that something that that is a source of hope for you as well in terms of the norms
[Amit Varma]: themselves changing over time?
[Amit Varma]: So if you have that internalised feeling that, hey, I shouldn't have to do all the housework,
[Amit Varma]: but you're too scared to say it, because of all of that culture around you, you know,
[Amit Varma]: does that change the culture at home as well gradually over a period of time?
[Guest]: Okay, so let me make three points on that.
[Guest]: One is that use and adoption of technology is itself endogenous to culture.
[Guest]: So for example, in 2017, there was a cat panchayat that actually in Uttar Pradesh that banned
[Guest]: women from having mobile phones.
[Guest]: There are also instances of surveillance technology on mobile phones, mirroring women's phones,
[Guest]: creating cameras to create their surveillance.
[Guest]: So the kinds of technologies people use is endogenous to culture.
[Guest]: My second point is that yes, on Instagram, people may see inspirational feminist messages,
[Guest]: they may see Bollywood stars doing things differently, refusing dowry, for example.
[Guest]: But what is equally important through my interviews is, and wait, and that is often contingent
[Guest]: on a democratic environment.
[Guest]: So for example, as I was saying in China, much of that is blacked out by the CCP.
[Guest]: So the advantage of India that there's less surveillance on that.
[Guest]: But still, even with the exposure to all those alternative ideologies, people often reflect
[Guest]: on them in their friendship groups, and their ability to act them out is dependent on how
[Guest]: they think they will be perceived and treated in their own communities.
[Guest]: So earlier last year, there was the torn jean thing.
[Guest]: So some guys said women shouldn't be wearing torn jeans, and then a bunch of women said,
[Guest]: hey, I'm wearing my torn jeans, and I'm proud of it.
[Guest]: But still, even if you saw that living in rural West Bengal, women might themselves
[Guest]: not wear shorts in that environment.
[Guest]: And so instead, JNU students, for example, were saying how excited they were to come
[Guest]: to JNU, where they knew it would be possible to wear shorts in that environment.
[Guest]: So it's not enough to see those Instagram inspirational messages.
[Guest]: It's about the specific environment, how you think you'll be perceived and treated.
[Guest]: So I would not say technology is inevitably emancipatory.
[Guest]: And technology itself can spread hateful, casteist, Islamophobic, sexist, racist messages.
[Guest]: So technology is always mediated by our culture, our institutions, etc.
[Amit Varma]: Sure.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it's not a magic bullet, but at least you're aware another sort of world exists
[Amit Varma]: out there.
[Amit Varma]: Let's sort of go back to talking about global history.
[Amit Varma]: We've looked at India and how India has evolved and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the rest of the world has evolved differently from India and differently from each other.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a sense of that, you know, Europe, China, East Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, you
[Amit Varma]: know, Latin America, give me a sense of the sort of currents that are shaping patriarchy
[Amit Varma]: or mitigating it in different ways in all of these places.
[Guest]: Okay, well, perhaps let's start with East Asia, because I think that's one really important
[Guest]: point in that I think it's important to understand how patriarchal it was historically, because
[Guest]: I think that's a really great comparison with with South Asia.
[Guest]: So the idea that men plough and women weave has this sort of gender division of labor
[Guest]: has always been idealized in Chinese literature right through to antiquity.
[Guest]: But the idea of the cult of chastity, the idea that the women should be confined to
[Guest]: the inner quarters really took root when Confucianism was popular.
[Guest]: So actually, after the collapse of the Han dynasty in 500 AD, 589 AD, when Confucianism
[Guest]: lost power, lost favor, actually, we saw the flourishing of Daoism and women were recognized
[Guest]: as scholars.
[Guest]: Women were recognized as knowledgeable authorities as moral authorities.
[Guest]: And yeah, women have exercised far greater freedoms and authority.
[Guest]: So what changed the big step change in Chinese gender relations and patriarchy was the Song
[Guest]: dynasty.
[Guest]: So several things, they introduced a meritocratic civil service exam, and also widespread printing.
[Guest]: And now what happened is the landed gentry was suddenly in a position of insecurity.
[Guest]: And here I'm heavily borrowing from the work of Yuhan Wang, who's over at Harvard and he's
[Guest]: got a new book out on this.
[Guest]: And so meritocratic civil service exam means that you have to massively invest in your
[Guest]: son's Confucian education in order to get that elite spot in the government.
[Guest]: Everyone wants a government job, right?
[Guest]: What's true in India today is also true in Song dynasty, right?
[Guest]: That was your pathway to prestige and power, etc.
[Guest]: So people heavily invested in their sons, but that also motivate, that also require,
[Guest]: but people also, but people that heavy motivation to invest in sons cultivate a desire for intergenerational
[Guest]: reciprocity.
[Guest]: So if you massively investigate in your son's education, you need to make sure they pay
[Guest]: back and you need these close-knit clans to cooperate to ensure basic survival, whether
[Guest]: it's irrigation, social services, health.
[Guest]: So close-knit clans are bonding closely together and they idealize the male lineage.
[Guest]: We see the flourishing of genealogy books, the flourishing of ancestor worship, the idea
[Guest]: of the, and that's preserved through the purity of the male line.
[Guest]: And once you idealize the purity of the male line, then you need tighter restrictions on
[Guest]: female ability, as was emphasized in Confucian literature and Confucian philosophy, which
[Guest]: of course everyone is studying or many learned people are studying because they need to get
[Guest]: into those state exams.
[Guest]: So we see this emergence of the cult of genealogy, the emergence of the ideal of male purity
[Guest]: and women increasingly retreat to the private sphere.
[Guest]: So this is when we see the cult of chastity being idealized in song literature.
[Guest]: Literature also emphasizes and celebrates female purity and celebrates women sacrificing
[Guest]: themselves for their family.
[Guest]: And I think this is such an important point that I previously didn't realize is that how
[Guest]: our mental models are shaped by literature and how actually many women might comply with
[Guest]: patriarchy because that is how you gain social esteem and praise.
[Guest]: Like the greatest thing a woman can do is sacrifice herself for male honor.
[Guest]: And we see parallels of that in India with Sati, for example, or Johar.
[Guest]: And then another step change occurred with the Mongol invasion.
[Guest]: So the Mongols came down to China, basically raiding, raping and pillaging, massive assault
[Guest]: on male honor with close parallels with Northwest invasions in India.
[Guest]: And then the Mongols tried to cultivate local legitimacy by adopting Confucian ideas.
[Guest]: They tried to show, you know, we're just as Chinese as the Chinese and the Han officials
[Guest]: underneath them also wanted to preserve their culture.
[Guest]: So they closely cling to these Confucian ideas.
[Guest]: And so then we see the ramping up of all these very patriarchal norms.
[Guest]: So paintings of that era, you do not see women on city streets.
[Guest]: So women are, their feet are bound and hobbled, especially in the North, less so in the South.
[Guest]: And literature reflects it.
[Guest]: So that's really the emergence of patriarchy in China.
[Guest]: As I was saying, from ancient Greece to Mesopotamia to much of the Middle East and North Africa,
[Guest]: also incredibly patriarchal.
[Guest]: So the whole of Eurasia was incredibly patriarchal at that time.
[Guest]: Now the areas that were different were places where you did not have nomadic pastoralism,
[Guest]: where you did not have the plow and where male-dominated religions did not emerge.
[Guest]: So for example, in the Philippines, where they didn't have plow agriculture, women traveled
[Guest]: freely.
[Guest]: So as we know from 10th century Chinese and European traders, they encountered Philippine
[Guest]: Southeast Asian women trading, they traveled great distances.
[Guest]: In the Philippines, it was women who acted as religious priestesses.
[Guest]: If men wanted to be religious figures, they had to act effeminately.
[Guest]: And if a woman wanted divorce, she could easily go and leave with half the shared slaves,
[Guest]: half the assets, etc.
[Guest]: And in fact, women were in such a position of authority and autonomy that they were in
[Guest]: a position to prioritize their sexual pleasure.
[Guest]: And so some asserted and demanded that men wear rather painful penis pins.
[Guest]: So this is one country, to the best of my knowledge, where you have female sexual pleasure
[Amit Varma]: is prioritized.
[Guest]: What is a penis pin?
[Guest]: I'm sorry.
[Guest]: I don't know exactly, but from the drawings, and I'll share that it looks like a pin that
[Guest]: goes through the penis with slight knobs on either side, perhaps some people.
[Guest]: So I think it's designed to enhance friction for female sexual pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: All right.
[Amit Varma]: No comment.
[Amit Varma]: I guess men deserve it.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Unknown]: Some men deserve it.
[Unknown]: Payback for patriarchy, right?
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Payback for patriarchy.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just glad it's not me.
[Unknown]: Okay.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: I confess I have no ethnographic experience to comment in this regard.
[Guest]: So Southeast Asia, relative weak restrictions on female mobility.
[Guest]: The Andes also really interesting.
[Guest]: So if we, although we don't have written scripts, so we have to be careful in inferring and
[Guest]: understanding what these societies were like.
[Guest]: If we look at iconography, if we look at art, if we look at artifacts, we see this strong
[Guest]: ideology of gender complementarity, that we see men and women working together.
[Guest]: And I suspect in the Andean civilization, well, they didn't have money and instead it
[Guest]: was a tribute redistribution economy in that people paid service to the empire.
[Guest]: So women contributed cloth, men contributed labor.
[Guest]: And so women's work was recognized as equally valuable.
[Guest]: And we did not see this patrilineal inheritance of wealth or relatively weak restrictions
[Guest]: on women's mobility.
[Guest]: They even recognized and celebrated trial marriage, premarital sexuality.
[Guest]: They had this idea of bilateral descent so that women descended from women and ultimately
[Guest]: from the moon goddess.
[Guest]: So there's this idea of gender complementarity running right through the Americas with relatively
[Guest]: weakened restrictions.
[Guest]: And that's celebrated through folklore, et cetera.
[Guest]: Now Africa is also incredibly fascinating and I think this is a great example of how
[Guest]: geography mediates cultural evolution.
[Guest]: So maybe 5,000 years ago, much of Sub-Saharan Africa might have been matrilineal, but this
[Guest]: changed with cattle and pastoralism.
[Guest]: So one, we have the Bantu expansion and that led to the spread of cattle.
[Guest]: Cattle raises the value of land, patrilineal inheritance.
[Guest]: Also we see nomadic pastoralism.
[Guest]: So again, it's gangs of men, gangs of young men raiding, raping their way through the
[Guest]: horn of Africa, down into Southern Africa, as we know through the genetic data.
[Guest]: And they institutionalized patriarchal dominance and ideology.
[Guest]: So if we look at the Maasai or Swana, these are male dominated village assemblies.
[Guest]: Women are minors without the voice of their own.
[Guest]: And there's also for the Swana, for example, men are revered, they are buried in the cattle
[Guest]: corral.
[Guest]: There are numerous sayings and proverbs saying, you know, women cannot lead, men are the ones
[Guest]: who are autonomous, men are the ones who are the good leaders, et cetera.
[Guest]: So that's the institution of patriarchy.
[Guest]: But the spread of pastoralism and cattle was mediated by geography.
[Guest]: So around the Gulf of Guinea, for example, they had the, I mispronounce this every time,
[Guest]: setse fly.
[Guest]: It's pronounced differently.
[Guest]: I buggered it up, but you'll forgive me.
[Guest]: This fly causes a sleeping sickness in cattle.
[Guest]: And so it was not possible to have cattle there.
[Guest]: So instead, land never became a valuable source of inheritance.
[Guest]: So although many of the communities in the Gulf of Guinea had patrilineal succession,
[Guest]: it was only men's control over the children.
[Guest]: So through bride wealth, their men are getting the children.
[Guest]: There's not about inherited wealth.
[Guest]: So as a result, these communities, women are moving freely.
[Guest]: Women have their own networks in the Yoruba and Igbo.
[Guest]: And I especially recommend Professor Achebe Nwando, Professor Nwando Achebe's book on
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: She highlights how there were women exercised authority and spirituality.
[Guest]: So you see that Lesser, the name for God, is neither male or female.
[Guest]: You see oracles and deities and women exercising spiritual authority.
[Guest]: Queen Mothers also revered women across West Africa.
[Guest]: Women are traders, they're merchants, they're running West African markets.
[Guest]: And because they have this mobility, they were able to protect their own turf.
[Guest]: Now on top of this, Islam spreads via networks of trade, but also amongst pastoralists.
[Guest]: So there's another element in which geography mediates cultural evolution.
[Guest]: And then fast forward a little bit to the 18th and 19th century, we have fuller jihads.
[Guest]: And these fuller jihads are led by pastoralists in northern Nigeria, they institutionalize
[Guest]: sharia law.
[Guest]: And at that same time, we see the emergence of purdah.
[Guest]: If you look at architecture, for example, that is when women are increasingly confined
[Guest]: to the inner quarters.
[Guest]: And families gain respectability by secluding their women and differentiating themselves
[Guest]: from slaves used in labor.
[Guest]: So it's this process of both geography and cultural evolution that's really important.
[Guest]: So we have patrilineal, patrilocal Eurasia, and then we have these matrilineal and bilateral
[Guest]: communities.
[Guest]: Then there occurred an important divergence within Eurasia, and that is what I was talking
[Guest]: about earlier, the emergence of nuclear families in Western Europe.
[Guest]: And so that created a latent asset.
[Guest]: So Europe was not gender equal, as I was saying, every institution was headed by men.
[Guest]: I don't want anyone in the world to think that I'm saying that Europe was ahead, Europe
[Guest]: was more gender equal, we had some great culture.
[Guest]: No, no, no, no.
[Guest]: In fact, women, so let me say, let me explain this, so one, even though women were working
[Guest]: before the modern era, women spent 60% of their adult years either pregnant or nursing.
[Guest]: So their mobility was hobbled, whereas men had far greater ability to capitalize on the
[Guest]: transition from feudalism to commercialization.
[Guest]: And as this occurred, men built guilds.
[Guest]: So these are organizations that preserved existing privileges and locked out other groups.
[Guest]: So they tried to disadvantage their competitors and prevent other groups for competing against
[Guest]: them or undercutting them.
[Guest]: So in places where there was weak economic growth and slow demand for labor, those were
[Guest]: especially patriarchal.
[Guest]: So for example, in Western Germany, women had no rights, they weren't allowed to use
[Guest]: to compete with the girls at all.
[Guest]: They also discriminated against immigrants for the exact same reason.
[Guest]: But where you see greater prosperity, like the Netherlands and parts of France, Paris,
[Guest]: then women could actually be included in guilds.
[Guest]: So there was less.
[Guest]: So when the pie was a little bit bigger, people might be a bit more prepared to share.
[Guest]: So the girls discriminated against women.
[Guest]: So the discrimination in Europe was not coming from within the household.
[Guest]: It was primarily coming from outsiders who didn't want women competing against them.
[Guest]: But women still had very weak social capital.
[Guest]: So when Protestant and Catholic churches competed in the counter-reformation and their struggle
[Guest]: for bums on seats or pews, they wanted to demonstrate their superior power to vanquish
[Guest]: the devil.
[Guest]: And they did so by burning witches, primarily women.
[Guest]: So women's social capital was weak.
[Guest]: Now let's fast forward to the Enlightenment.
[Guest]: Now the Enlightenment was an age of great innovation and discovery.
[Guest]: And men, whether they're engineers, scientists, entrepreneurs, they gather together to hear
[Guest]: the latest innovations, to hear about scientific advances.
[Guest]: And this enables collaborative creativity.
[Guest]: The brilliant people, like when we went to our conference in Udaipur, brilliant people
[Guest]: come together, share ideas, encourage each other, support each other.
[Guest]: And Joel Mokia has a wonderful book on the enlightened economy, talking about why collaborative
[Guest]: creativity is so important.
[Guest]: And these groups are amplifying each other, they're supporting each other, they're amplifying
[Guest]: each other's ideas on megaphones.
[Guest]: Freemasons go to court to protect each other's reputations.
[Guest]: Whereas in the English speaking world, 95% of these associations are male, discriminating
[Guest]: against women.
[Guest]: And so there were brilliant women, but they're toiling in solitude.
[Guest]: I mean, there were a few Dutch Masonic lodges, London had a few women debating societies.
[Guest]: But for the most part, women were locked out.
[Guest]: So they're not getting that kind of support and encouragement and peer feedback, etc.
[Guest]: So they're not able to benefit from this enlightenment.
[Guest]: That said, we do see slightly higher rates of female writing in Protestant countries.
[Guest]: And that's partly as a result of solar scripture, the idea that every person should understand
[Guest]: the Bible for themselves.
[Guest]: And that led to a reduction in gender gaps.
[Guest]: So we did have a little bit of women's writing, especially in Protestant countries.
[Guest]: But still, all the institutions are predominantly male, are male dominated.
[Guest]: So now, okay, let's make it so Europe, patriarchal, but with this latent asset of participatory
[Guest]: institutions, nuclear families and state institutions.
[Guest]: Contrast that with the Middle East and North Africa, and these Ottoman towns are much more
[Guest]: gender segregated.
[Guest]: But women were by no means passive.
[Guest]: So because married women had these property rights, if you look at court records, if you
[Guest]: look at court records from Ain Tab, from Cairo, Damascus, you see women litigating in court,
[Guest]: they're pursuing thieves, they're hounding, they're hounding people, they're pressing
[Guest]: for their inheritance rights, they're pressing for their claims on property, they're owning
[Guest]: various houses, assets, gardens, orchards, donkeys, etc.
[Guest]: However, we tend not to see, but we tend to not, but elite and wealthy women tended to
[Guest]: send emissaries on their behalf, so they could maintain seclusion because that was respectable.
[Guest]: But again, we don't see, I still would not say that the Middle East was especially patriarchal
[Guest]: at that time, because at that time, the vast majority of people across the world are peasants.
[Guest]: Pretty much most women are working in peasants in family farms, where again, you don't have
[Guest]: many exit options.
[Guest]: So again, you're vulnerable to male violence, etc.
[Guest]: And you probably internalize all the, and many people would have internalized patriarchal
[Guest]: traditions.
[Guest]: So Ottoman towns, more gender segregated, but much of Eurasia is very patriarchal.
[Guest]: We just have this latent divergence that would appear much more important later on in the
[Guest]: 20th century.
[Guest]: Another important issue I should highlight, sorry, skipping over to Song China, is Song
[Guest]: China actually outlawed cousin marriage, so you're not allowed to marry anyone with your
[Guest]: same surname.
[Guest]: So that would have led to weaker clans, so far weaker kinship intensity, which would
[Guest]: prove important later on.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So now we have the main map of the world.
[Guest]: Oh, I should also talk about colonialism.
[Guest]: So the impact of colonialism.
[Guest]: So many scholars raise concerns that colonialism could have perpetuated patriarchy, because
[Guest]: of course, the Europeans were incredibly patriarchal at that time, undeniably.
[Guest]: And they often emphasize, but I do not think that colonialism is responsible for the contemporary
[Guest]: divergence in outcomes by pressing for their patriarchal beliefs.
[Guest]: So let me give you the example, let's, but we have to take each region in turn.
[Guest]: So if we look at colonialism in Latin America, where colonialism was horrifically impressive,
[Guest]: they, they spawned disease, millions of people died.
[Guest]: They also butchered and enslaved Native Americans, and there was horrific violence, rapes, etc.
[Guest]: That said, indigenous people fiercely maintained their own traditions.
[Guest]: So while Catholics might call trial marriage diabolical, Andean civilizations often continue
[Guest]: to practice it.
[Guest]: In fact, in 1789, there was an indigenous people's rebellion, 44% of those leaders were
[Guest]: women.
[Guest]: So they continue to practice their ideal, and still today, Peru has very high rates
[Guest]: of female labor force participation.
[Guest]: And for the most part, across Latin America, they had fairly weak ties of kinship in that
[Guest]: there are fairly weak, fairly weak bond, fairly weak marital bonds in that in Sao Paulo in
[Guest]: the 17th century in Mexico City in the 19th century, you'll find lots of single women
[Guest]: working by themselves independently.
[Guest]: It was really only the very, very tiny elites, landowners, that would practice cousin marriage
[Guest]: and female seclusion and chastity and confinement in order to preserve their important landholding.
[Guest]: So Latin America, though, I'd say one more important aspect there is the spread of Catholicism.
[Guest]: Catholicism promoted this idea of the cult of virginity, the idea of shame.
[Guest]: So yeah, so Catholicism, definitely, definitely, definitely a regressive religion for the most
[Guest]: part.
[Guest]: But there's, you know, the way that people adopt that and how they adopt it is mediated
[Guest]: by their indigenous culture.
[Guest]: Now I think, let me talk, I want to, I'll come back, I want to talk more, let me put
[Guest]: colonialism on hold, because I'll come back to it in the case of Africa.
[Guest]: But I can talk about colonialism for any reason.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I'll come back to that.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: The next thing I want to do is to talk about industrialization in the 20th century.
[Guest]: Now this was phenomenally important.
[Guest]: And this is where we see the honor income trade-off taking off, because with technological
[Guest]: change, reducing the domestic drudgery, and also job-creating economic growth, means that
[Guest]: employers who might initially prefer to hire men, eventually run out of men.
[Guest]: And here I'm borrowing work by Professor Claudia Goldin, and they run out of men.
[Guest]: So they run out of men and increasingly hire women.
[Guest]: And so we see this in every single country.
[Guest]: Even more recently in Turkey, where we have strong job-creating economic growth, at least
[Guest]: before 2018, then we see rising female labor force participation.
[Guest]: Same in East Asia, Taiwan, and much of Europe.
[Guest]: So in Europe, where the constraints, where the restrictions on female mobility are relatively
[Guest]: weak, then when you get higher female education, then when fertility goes down, women seize
[Guest]: economic opportunities in their droves.
[Guest]: And this is because of the latent asset of nuclear families, where there is this weaker
[Guest]: concern for honor, and where families really, where a woman's earnings make a massive difference
[Guest]: to household survival.
[Guest]: Then we see in the 1970s, there's liberalization of divorce laws, both in the USA and Europe,
[Guest]: and women cease to believe that marriage offers decent security and insurance.
[Guest]: So they become much more committed to the labor market.
[Guest]: They pursue careers, and they become much more independently minded.
[Guest]: And through that, they generate friendships.
[Guest]: So that's the really important, that's why the great gender divergence occurred in the
[Guest]: 20th century, because it's this economic, the culture is responding to economic changes.
[Guest]: Now another really important dimension is communism.
[Guest]: And here again, I can say something controversial, that I think communism, totalitarian communism,
[Guest]: may be the world's greatest intervention for women's economic empowerment.
[Guest]: And let me explain.
[Guest]: So communism is run on, totalitarianism, totalitarian communism, is run on a model of extensive
[Guest]: growth, that central planners set wages low, and demanded very high productivity targets.
[Guest]: So consider yourself in the position of each firm, it's very cheap to hire in labor, and
[Guest]: you want to get as much labor as possible in order to meet your production target.
[Guest]: So what do you do?
[Guest]: You recruit lots of men, and you also recruit women.
[Guest]: And women themselves have a strong incentive to seek those jobs, because male wages are
[Guest]: very low, they cannot, the male breadwinner model would not exist, because male earnings
[Guest]: were so low.
[Guest]: And also that jobs with a passport to social security, social services, holidays, amenities,
[Guest]: everything, apartments.
[Guest]: So post-communist countries have very high rates of female employment.
[Guest]: It's not just that women are working, but also labor market advancement.
[Guest]: So in Russia, 44% of economists are women.
[Guest]: We see much smaller gender gaps in business ownership, business management, in post-communist
[Guest]: countries.
[Guest]: Also, post-communist countries have very small, and well, they're the smallest gender gaps
[Guest]: in competitive chess.
[Guest]: So in terms of the economy, yeah, the gender gaps are smaller.
[Guest]: However, because totalitarian communism suffocated activism, we do not see the emergence of feminist
[Guest]: activism, as I mentioned earlier.
[Guest]: So we don't see strong pressure for reforms in government, for female representation,
[Guest]: and also protections for male violence.
[Guest]: However, and this is where my comparative lens is important.
[Guest]: If you look, if you compare post-communist countries, their peers, you see that generally
[Guest]: people in post-communist countries are more sexist.
[Guest]: But there's one exception, Central Asia.
[Guest]: So Central Asia, we're talking about Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan.
[Guest]: Now, in Uzbekistan, in Fergana Valley in the 1920s, women were marrying at 13.
[Guest]: They're fully veiled, their faces are covered, they're clinging closely to the walls.
[Guest]: What then happens is that the Soviet Union was incredibly brutal.
[Guest]: They butchered, decimated and destroyed traditional institutions, just as they did in Russia.
[Guest]: This destroyed indigenous resistance, so it's harder to preserve indigenous traditions.
[Guest]: They also forced collectivization, now millions of people and also animals died.
[Guest]: But it also made that the Soviets were able to assert their ideology.
[Guest]: So they imposed secular schools where women were taught and prepared for a life in the
[Guest]: public sphere, so taught drama and sports, etc.
[Guest]: And also because they ramped up industrialization, they created hydroelectric power, they had
[Guest]: factories, those factories needed women, and they also provide nurseries and creches.
[Guest]: So we see a rapid increase in female labor force participation.
[Guest]: Now I'm not trying to say that Uzbekistan is some feminist utopia, but if you listen
[Guest]: to women's narratives, you listen to women who are postgraduate researchers in science
[Guest]: and technology, and their work is being celebrated, even beetroot farmers are celebrated as heroes
[Guest]: of socialist labor.
[Guest]: And they'll say, you know, compared to my mother, when my mother was secluded, my mother
[Guest]: was treated as a slave, and here I am as an independent career woman.
[Guest]: Of course, feminist activism is suppressed, of course.
[Guest]: But if you compare those countries to the relevant counterfactuals, which might be Afghanistan
[Guest]: and Pakistan, then you see an enormous divergence in outcomes.
[Guest]: So in that respect, those post-communist Central Asian countries are actually much more gender
[Guest]: equal as a result of communism.
[Guest]: So communism's impact on gender equality in gender relations differs on its domain, economy
[Guest]: versus the political environment, and it's also media.
[Guest]: And I would say, so I would say that for China and Russia, and those countries where there
[Guest]: are relatively weak constraints on female mobility, communism actually took gender equality
[Guest]: backwards or is worse than it would have been because female employment could have risen
[Guest]: anyway with growth.
[Guest]: And communism made a step, made it more patriarchal by suffocating activism, which is incredibly
[Guest]: important.
[Guest]: Now, I think the lesson from communism is that high female employment is no guard against
[Guest]: misogyny.
[Guest]: You know, you can still have incredibly high rates of male violence, persistence of sexist
[Guest]: ideologies.
[Guest]: You know, in Russia, the Orthodox Church champions very patriarchal ideologies.
[Guest]: So what's incredibly important is feminist activism.
[Guest]: And I think a great example there is Latin America.
[Guest]: So this was a patriarchal region, partly thanks to Catholicism.
[Guest]: For example, in Chile in the 1990s, the cabinet, parliament, almost entirely male, but women
[Guest]: have increasingly organized.
[Guest]: So one through relatively weak, with relatively weak kinship intensity, relatively weak concerns
[Guest]: for honor.
[Guest]: Women increasingly seize the economic opportunities.
[Guest]: They increasingly gathered in the public sphere.
[Guest]: They organized collectively.
[Guest]: Women were at the forefront of many of the protests for democratization, protesting the
[Guest]: disappeared.
[Guest]: Then those women are organizing, sharing and learning from each other across the region.
[Guest]: And this, I think, is a really important point about activism, but it's by seeing that people
[Guest]: who we think are in a similar position as us or as our relevant peers, if we can see
[Guest]: people we think are like us gaining something through successful activism, then we may become
[Guest]: emboldened.
[Guest]: So as Latin American feminists saw that a neighboring country could mobilize and gain
[Guest]: some returns, that emboldens hope and that encourages relentless activism.
[Guest]: And so we see these encuentros across Latin America, whereby women are increased.
[Guest]: So in 2015, one woman tweeted, ni una menos, and that means not one woman less, not one
[Guest]: woman less should die from male violence and femicide.
[Guest]: And so 200,000 women took to the streets of Buenos Aires.
[Guest]: So now in an environment of democratization, urbanization, social media, these ideas can
[Guest]: spread like wildfire and they're celebrated in street murals.
[Guest]: And people are, you know, challenging ideas of shame, challenging the idea that if a woman
[Guest]: is raped, then it's her burden, it's her shame and her stigma and she should keep it to herself
[Guest]: and she should be quiet.
[Guest]: And so there was a Chilean protest anthem saying, you know, the problem, the problem
[Guest]: is with the rapist.
[Guest]: The problem is not with me.
[Guest]: And so those ideas reverberate and women become emboldened.
[Guest]: So we see massive campaigns for women's political representation and across Latin America, gender
[Guest]: parity, not gender quotas, but parity is seen as part of human rights and democracy.
[Guest]: So we see huge struggles for domestic workers' rights, for protections against male violence,
[Guest]: for political representation.
[Guest]: And this builds on a culture where there's been massive resistance, where there's been
[Guest]: indigenous people's movements, where there's been piqueteros in Argentina, for example,
[Guest]: the gas wars in Bolivia, the water wars in Bolivia.
[Guest]: So that environment of resistance seen by mobilizing people can change the laws of the
[Guest]: land also emboldens feminist activism.
[Guest]: So feminist activism is endogenous to that culture of resistance.
[Guest]: So that's Latin America as an example of feminist activism.
[Guest]: And that's true for the whole world.
[Guest]: Now this is where I want to come back to colonialism.
[Guest]: So Sub-Saharan Africa has also seen many feminist movements pushing for greater women's representation.
[Guest]: And we especially see those in periods of transition, regime transition, or after post-conflict
[Guest]: women's movements mobilized and organized for better representation and gender quotas.
[Guest]: However, one part of Africa remains especially patriarchal in terms of governance.
[Guest]: And that surprisingly is the Gulf of Guinea, which I previously said was very, very gender
[Guest]: equal, right?
[Guest]: So what's happened there?
[Guest]: Now this is my hypothesis.
[Guest]: So yeah, we have this conundrum that there was this, we have definite evidence of traditions
[Guest]: of women exercising authority and being respected as positions of authority across the Gulf
[Guest]: of Guinea.
[Guest]: But now, this is one of the most patriarchal regions of the world.
[Guest]: So Nigeria's parliament is 94% male.
[Guest]: And it's true across the Gulf of Guinea, all those parliaments are very, very patriarchal.
[Guest]: And why is that?
[Guest]: So my hypothesis is, and this is borrowing heavily on the work of Nathan Nunn and Leonard
[Guest]: Wanchekon, is that this is the area that was heavily hit by slave raiding.
[Guest]: So as there was slave raiding, indigenous Africans tried to protect themselves often
[Guest]: through this weapons and slaves vicious cycle.
[Guest]: So to protect themselves against raiders, they sought to actually raid other slaves
[Guest]: and sell them to Europeans in order to buy the weapons that they needed to protect themselves.
[Guest]: And this cycle of violence and conquest and slave raiding may have exacerbated distrust,
[Guest]: may have exacerbated ethnic division.
[Guest]: So if we look at West Africa today, we see that ethnic divisions and stratification are
[Guest]: especially politicised in West Africa.
[Guest]: Now why might that be correlated with this patriarchal governance?
[Guest]: My suggestion is that, well, colonial borders were imposed arbitrarily across ethnic groups.
[Guest]: So you've got a bunch of ethnic groups grouped together.
[Guest]: And because of that history of slave raiding, we have this culture of distrust and animosity
[Guest]: and ethnic divisions.
[Guest]: So what I think has happened is that if your ethnic identity is primary, you may prefer
[Guest]: to be represented by someone from your group.
[Guest]: A Yoruba wants a Yoruba leader.
[Guest]: It doesn't matter for a Yoruba, hey, here's a woman and she's Hausa, but that's Hausa,
[Guest]: that's Northern Nigeria, that's a different religion, that's a different ethnicity.
[Guest]: So I think where ethnicity is primary, that may weaken the strong, sustained nationwide
[Guest]: feminist mobilisation that is necessary for strong campaigns for women's political representation.
[Guest]: So as a result of that, as a result of arbitrary colonial borders and also slave raiding, I
[Guest]: think that's why West Africa and especially the Gulf of Guinea is so patriarchal.
[Guest]: Now, for the rest of Africa, I think the impact of colonialism would have been more indirect.
[Guest]: So to the extent that colonialism exacerbated corruption, to the extent that colonialism
[Guest]: exacerbated authoritarianism or stunted development, all that stuff is bad for gender equality.
[Guest]: But I don't think the mechanism was that.
[Guest]: So lots of gender scholars think that the mechanism is the male bias in colonial institutions,
[Guest]: like patriarchal colonisers go in there spreading their ideologies.
[Guest]: I don't think that's it.
[Guest]: I think it's slightly different mechanisms.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, right.
[Guest]: So that was the feminist activism case.
[Guest]: So I think we've pretty much covered most regions.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So the big story, the three main drivers of patriarchy are the plough, nomadic pastoralism
[Guest]: and male dominated religions.
[Guest]: But their spread, that cultural evolution is mediated by geography.
[Guest]: And then it's and that that story explains why some cultures and why in some cultures
[Guest]: male honour is contingent upon female chastity.
[Guest]: And that explains why in some places like South Asia, the Middle East and North Africa,
[Guest]: male earnings need to be sufficiently high to compensate for that loss of male honour.
[Guest]: And if the earnings remain low, if you have a situation of jobless growth or indeed no
[Guest]: growth at all, then women remain trapped in their homes, dependent on patriarchal guardians,
[Guest]: lacking the exposure or friendships to challenge some of those patriarchal ideologies.
[Unknown]: So that I think is the story of the great gender divergence.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, I feel like you just gave me such a masterclass.
[Amit Varma]: So thank you for that.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, on the point of the gender gap between chess players, I think today the
[Amit Varma]: countries where the gender gap is the least is perhaps China.
[Amit Varma]: But having said that, you know, the former Soviet countries are closed, India is closed.
[Amit Varma]: And there are so few women who are above 2600 that it's really, you know, it's hard to tell
[Amit Varma]: between these.
[Amit Varma]: But certainly the gender gap has reduced in all of these places.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd say overall, and by the way, we had a coffee break just before this, and I'm sure
[Amit Varma]: you know this, but the coffee break happened because of a woman's labor movement.
[Amit Varma]: Are you aware of this?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me.
[Amit Varma]: So there's a video by Michael Pollan on this.
[Amit Varma]: I think he came on the Joe Rogan show, and it's about coffee.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll share that in the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And Pollan's essential point was that both the Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolution,
[Amit Varma]: as per him, were enabled by coffee, because caffeine helped people work longer hours and
[Amit Varma]: better.
[Amit Varma]: So what happened, and I think this was perhaps in the 1860s or 1870s, whatever, I'm sure
[Amit Varma]: I'll get the details wrong, but the link is in the show notes, you can see it there, is
[Amit Varma]: that in that second half of the 19th century, there were factories which were replacing
[Amit Varma]: male workers with female workers, because the female workers were more diligent and
[Amit Varma]: could focus on the work and so on and so forth, no surprise there.
[Amit Varma]: But even they would run out of energy towards the middle of the day.
[Amit Varma]: So then the female workers got together and they went on strike, and their union or whatever
[Amit Varma]: it was, they had exactly one demand, and that demand was for a coffee break, because they
[Amit Varma]: felt correctly, as it turned out, that coffee would give them energy and they would be able
[Amit Varma]: to work longer hours and therefore make more money.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, so that's where the coffee break comes.
[Amit Varma]: So every man who ever takes a coffee break, you owe it to a woman.
[Amit Varma]: So the interesting part of this entire history that you've shared, and you've obviously,
[Amit Varma]: you know, to make it fittable into this podcast, you've also sort of painted broad strokes.
[Amit Varma]: If you wanted to, I'm sure you could, you know, break up the continents into countries
[Amit Varma]: and into regions and so on.
[Guest]: Yeah, so for example, if you wanted to, I could explain the difference between the USA
[Guest]: and Europe, for example, and the US's recent restrictions on abortion.
[Guest]: That's one thing we could discuss.
[Amit Varma]: You can pick any country and I can talk about it really.
[Amit Varma]: We'll come to the US, but my larger question first was that, while we can look at the different
[Amit Varma]: ways in which, you know, the divergence has taken place, we see a host of reasons that
[Amit Varma]: are deeply complicated.
[Amit Varma]: But when we speak about coming out of it, about women getting empowered, it seems that
[Amit Varma]: there the story is fairly simple.
[Amit Varma]: Economic growth is a big part of the job creating.
[Amit Varma]: Job creating economic growth is a big part of the solution and structural transformations
[Amit Varma]: are a big part of the solution in terms of getting rid of some of these incentives towards
[Amit Varma]: female seclusion, as you point out, which are strong in some places and not so strong
[Amit Varma]: in others.
[Amit Varma]: So broadly, tell me about, you know, if we look at job creating economic growth and the
[Amit Varma]: social changes that lead to a change of incentives, therefore being the way out of this for everybody,
[Amit Varma]: then it seems to me that it's a cause for great hope that sooner or later it will happen.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I know at the start of this episode, you said that no, no, you know, there is climate
[Amit Varma]: change and there is automation and there are authoritarian dictatorships and all those
[Amit Varma]: worries are there.
[Amit Varma]: But assuming we get past those worries and there is, you know, growth, then, you know,
[Amit Varma]: even if we regressed in different ways, we can progress in the same ways.
[Unknown]: What are your thoughts?
[Unknown]: Yes.
[Unknown]: So my model is, if there's job creating economic growth, then we should anticipate rising female
[Unknown]: labor force participation.
[Unknown]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: That's, that's the, it's as simple as that.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about the US now.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Why is the US going backwards?
[Amit Varma]: Why don't women own their own bodies anymore?
[Guest]: Okay, so I think my, so the US, so it was persecuted religious minorities who fled Europe
[Guest]: and went to the USA.
[Guest]: So people for whom religion was so important that they would travel across a massive ocean
[Guest]: at a time of incredible proscurity.
[Guest]: Those are the people who landed up in the USA.
[Guest]: And so those people then socialized their children to care much more about religion.
[Guest]: And we also know that the USA had a sort of more open marketplace for different religions
[Guest]: that led to competition, that led to innovation.
[Guest]: So, you know, churches are cultivating and attracting more members.
[Guest]: So one is we see greater religiosity and that's associated with far higher support for abortion
[Guest]: restrictions.
[Guest]: On top of that, the US is, another patriarchal aspect, patriarchal also varies by class within
[Guest]: the USA.
[Guest]: So because of the history of enslaving African Americans, that ethnic diversity appears to
[Guest]: be associated with lower contributions to public goods.
[Guest]: And here I'm drawing on a paper by Bill Easterly and others, and they find that in ethnically
[Guest]: diverse places, people don't, people may not be as likely to associate with the other,
[Guest]: not wanting to share or pool resources.
[Guest]: So in that context, that might explain why Americans may be privately wealthy, but don't
[Guest]: have great public goods and don't have great public infrastructure.
[Guest]: And so that means that we see weaker protections and support for working for families and working
[Guest]: class women struggle to get the support they need to manage work and employment.
[Guest]: So we see large gender wage gaps for working class women.
[Guest]: That said, in a more liberalized economy, we tend to see women doing better in managerial
[Guest]: roles.
[Guest]: So in the US, it's the elite professional women who are thriving in a more liberalized
[Guest]: environment.
[Guest]: So the gender, the USA also suffers from the majoritarian first post, the post system,
[Guest]: which India also shares now that and is inherited by the colonial English.
[Guest]: And that is associated with lower rates of women's political representation.
[Guest]: So that I think is another thing Indians can blame the UK for in terms of colonialism,
[Guest]: that had they adopted proportional representation by much of continental Europe and the Scandinavians,
[Guest]: then we'd expect higher rates of female political representation.
[Guest]: And when women are in positions of power, they're more able to assert and push for more
[Guest]: gender equal governance.
[Guest]: The other thing that I wanted to discuss in relation to India is fear of crime.
[Amit Varma]: Should we talk about that?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, totally.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: But about the US, my specific question was, why does it seem like we're going backwards
[Amit Varma]: from 20 years ago?
[Amit Varma]: So I'm not looking at the broad swath of history and how, you know, the original immigrants
[Unknown]: got there.
[Guest]: So I think this is, if you look at the data, there has been this persistent religiosity
[Guest]: in some communities and where that religiosity is higher, then we see the strong support
[Guest]: for abortion.
[Guest]: We also see the rise of authoritarianism.
[Guest]: So where Republicans feel that they are under threat, they've increasingly restricted people's
[Guest]: right to vote, increasingly punishing and restricting people of colour.
[Guest]: So that's the rise of authoritarianism to entrench, entrench their dominance.
[Guest]: There's a great book called Entrenchment.
[Guest]: So yes, it's part of that counter struggle to entrench the religious right.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Let's go back to India and talk about the fear of crime.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So we've agreed that job creating economic growth is incredibly important for gender
[Guest]: equality, equally important is public safety for women and ending male impunity for violence,
[Guest]: assault and harassment.
[Guest]: And I explicitly want to centre on ending men's impunity rather than women's safety
[Guest]: because it's absolutely about ending men's impunity for violence.
[Guest]: And this, this works, I think, in four ways that restrict women's freedoms and restrict
[Guest]: women's movements.
[Guest]: So one is fear of crime leads to tighter restrictions on women's mobility.
[Guest]: So when families are concerned that women may be assaulted or it's unsafe, they restrict
[Guest]: their girls from going out.
[Guest]: And I've had numerous interviews about this.
[Guest]: And there's also a bunch of papers about when women fear or anticipate crime, they choose
[Guest]: worse colleges that affects their employment options.
[Guest]: And let me also stress, there's a religious element to this.
[Guest]: So after the horrific riots in Gujarat, many Muslim women feared violence and so restricted
[Guest]: themselves to Muslim ghettos because they were so afraid.
[Guest]: So that inter-religious violence and intimidation actually thwarts gender equality because women
[Guest]: choose inferior, less good colleges and worse than their labour market options because they're
[Guest]: so fearful of violence.
[Guest]: So the inter-religious violence is absolutely going to suppress female labour force participation
[Guest]: in Muslim communities.
[Guest]: So I wanted to stress that.
[Guest]: So female safety is really important there.
[Guest]: So the fear of violence and also media reports of violence may fuel these concerns about
[Guest]: the city is unsafe.
[Guest]: So for example, I interviewed a woman recently, she has a job in Delhi, but her mother drives
[Guest]: her to and from work because she doesn't think the stations are safe.
[Guest]: Now this is also this fear of crime is exacerbated by traditions of female seclusion.
[Guest]: So the more that women are kept closely to the home, the more that their freedoms are
[Guest]: restricted, the less they gain the capacity to independently navigate and explore the
[Guest]: cities for themselves and the more their families continue to be protective because they do
[Guest]: not see women being competent in exploring their cities for themselves.
[Guest]: And the more that women themselves may be fearful.
[Guest]: And here's one hypothesis that other researchers might test and it's come up in my own interviews.
[Guest]: I was talking to a woman from Bangalore and she was 17 at the time of the 2012 horrific
[Guest]: gang rape in Delhi.
[Guest]: And at that time she did not want to come to Delhi because she perceived Delhi as violent.
[Guest]: So she chose to study in Bangalore because of her fear of crime.
[Guest]: And I think here's one area whereby, I mean, if you read any Indian newspaper at least
[Guest]: once a week, you'll be continually reading stories about horrific gang rapes, violence.
[Guest]: And I think that's partly a consequence of a huge population.
[Guest]: In a country of 1.3 billion, you're bound to hear something about horrific violence.
[Guest]: So it's partly about objective dangers.
[Guest]: But also the media is continually perpetrating this idea that streets are unsafe.
[Guest]: And also the way these stories are reported, and you're a journalist, so you know this
[Guest]: better than me, but often the emphasis on the horrific violence against women, the images
[Guest]: themselves often are cartoons or sort of animations visualizing gang rape.
[Guest]: And often the perpetrator is still on the loose.
[Guest]: The story is not about this man has been imprisoned, this man has been held to account, this man
[Guest]: is now behind bars.
[Guest]: The story is always there are these horrific things happening in your neighborhood.
[Guest]: And so I think that itself may be inculcating fear among women.
[Guest]: So it's one, the fear of crime, exacerbated by this media reporting, and the more that
[Guest]: families fear that, the more they restrict women, the more that women never gain those
[Guest]: opportunities.
[Guest]: And we know those opportunities for independent mobility are so important.
[Guest]: So in my interviews here in India, when I talk to entrepreneurial go-getting independent
[Guest]: women, the way they've developed their autonomy and confidence is through iterative exploration.
[Guest]: You know, the more that women travel independently, the more they explore different areas, they
[Guest]: realize they can do it myself.
[Guest]: You know, Indian women's story is just the same story that I told you, right?
[Guest]: It's about trying stuff out, seeing you can do it and gaining confidence and parents gaining
[Guest]: confidence in you.
[Guest]: And let me draw a comparison with a woman I interviewed in Marrakesh.
[Guest]: Her family was initially reluctant to her about her working in tourism because they
[Guest]: perceived this is unsafe for women because she had to deal with so many different men.
[Guest]: But she persuaded her father and she said, you know, let me try this out.
[Guest]: And her father agreed and she showed him that she could do it.
[Guest]: She showed him that she could independently navigate.
[Guest]: So she set up a shop selling argan oil.
[Guest]: She set up a tour guide operation and her father saw that she could handle herself independently.
[Guest]: And he increasingly granted her more and more freedoms because he saw that she could manage.
[Guest]: So we do see this positive feedback loop.
[Guest]: The more the parents loosen those restrictions, the more they gain confidence in women's skills
[Guest]: to navigate alone.
[Guest]: So it's a matter of being shifting between two equilibrium.
[Guest]: Added to this, I think there are two more important factors in how fear of crime comes
[Guest]: out.
[Guest]: It's not just about fear of crime.
[Guest]: It's the idea that if a sexual assault were to happen, it would be the absolute worst
[Guest]: thing in the world.
[Guest]: Her life would be over.
[Guest]: And this plays out both in terms of internalised ideologies of shame and the woman feeling
[Guest]: horrific and that this is the worst thing ever because purity is so important.
[Guest]: And also, what will others think?
[Guest]: And the idea that, you know, what was she wearing, the blame on the victim, the idea
[Guest]: that she is loose.
[Guest]: And then the entire family's name could be jeopardised.
[Guest]: Her sisters could be seen as unmarriable.
[Guest]: So I think it's four mechanisms.
[Guest]: One, it's fear of crime.
[Guest]: Two, it's the belief that women are incapable of navigating alone.
[Guest]: And that's reinforced and that follows a history of seclusion.
[Guest]: Three, it's the idea that sexual assault is a fate worse than death.
[Guest]: And four, it's the concern that what will other people think?
[Guest]: And the way that three and four work, or the way that they can be overturned, is absolutely
[Guest]: through feminist activism.
[Guest]: Feminist activism to challenge ideologies of shame.
[Guest]: Feminist ideologies to...
[Guest]: And because the more that women speak out, you know, because you have to counter the
[Guest]: shame, you have to counter the sexual, the social policing in order for women to even
[Guest]: come forward.
[Guest]: So again, to give another example from JNU.
[Guest]: So JNU has these boards against sexual harassment with representation from NGOs and students.
[Guest]: But if women fear social condemnation from their own communities, they may not even report
[Guest]: sexual harassment.
[Guest]: You know, if you think your parents will be furious from you having any kind of altercation
[Guest]: or interaction with men, then you might not want to press a claim.
[Guest]: So no matter how good that institution is, women might not want to become public.
[Guest]: I mean, the same thing happened in Japan.
[Guest]: Japan had no Me Too movement because all the women, most, the vast majority of women remained
[Guest]: too ashamed, too fearful to come out.
[Guest]: Let me add a further important point about fear of crime.
[Guest]: If Muslim women anticipate violence from Hindu men, like horrific rapes, and if the state
[Guest]: allows male impunity for that violence, as we've recently seen, then Muslim women may
[Guest]: be increasingly fearful, remaining increasingly close to their own communities, not seizing
[Guest]: educational or employment opportunities, and then remaining more dependent on patriarchal
[Guest]: guardians.
[Guest]: So, yeah, the best thing, so if the government really wants to support gender equality in
[Guest]: Muslim communities, then the main drivers are absolutely the same universally, is job
[Guest]: creating economic growth, enabling communities to flourish, to seize economic opportunities,
[Guest]: to prosper, and also to ensure families of safety, so that women can seize these economic
[Guest]: opportunities.
[Amit Varma]: A lot of great points, and I'm especially struck by the tragic vicious cycle that women
[Amit Varma]: can get trapped in, where they feel that, hey, you know, it's not safe outside because
[Amit Varma]: there's so much news of crimes, and therefore they don't go out, and because they don't
[Amit Varma]: go out, they don't develop the capacity to deal with whatever might be out there, nor
[Amit Varma]: the recognition that perhaps what is out there is not quite as bad as the news makes it out
[Amit Varma]: to be, and they just get stuck in that equilibrium, as you pointed out.
[Amit Varma]: And also there is, you know, when you speak of the media, I mean, that's again a dilemma,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: Because as Steven Pinker has put it, we have a bias for bad news, right?
[Amit Varma]: Man bites dog is always news, dog licks man isn't news, you know, some horrific thing
[Amit Varma]: happened to a woman somewhere is news, and at the same time, you know, millions of women
[Amit Varma]: travel to and from office to home and nothing happened, that's obviously not news.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, I think it's also a responsibility of journalists to report this
[Amit Varma]: kind of news.
[Amit Varma]: And that's why the outrage around Nirbhaya happened.
[Amit Varma]: That's why the laws got changed.
[Amit Varma]: That's why there was a flip to the feminist movement around that time, because the media
[Amit Varma]: made a big deal out of it.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, so that is a dilemma.
[Amit Varma]: I think in this particular case, while I recognize the role that this kind of reporting can make
[Amit Varma]: in giving people the impression that the world is more violent than it actually is, I still
[Amit Varma]: think this kind of reporting is important, because, hey, you know, that's, that's a journalist
[Amit Varma]: job, you have to point out what's wrong with the world.
[Amit Varma]: So I guess that's just one of those dilemmas in this kind of...
[Guest]: Yes, that's a great point.
[Guest]: Let me caveat, I don't want to give the impression that I think fear of crime is entirely in
[Guest]: people's own minds.
[Guest]: What I want to say is how it leads to heightened restrictions on women, and then fewer women
[Guest]: in the streets, then those streets feel increasingly unsafe.
[Guest]: So if you're the only woman in the street, then you feel much more frightened, then you're
[Guest]: much more afraid, because you don't have that solidarity, and that support from other women.
[Guest]: Now, what's the best way, and I also, you know, there are also cases, and I want to
[Guest]: also give another example of why silence is, can be so, can trap people.
[Guest]: So for example, I was talking to one woman who grew up in Mumbai, and she was telling
[Guest]: me that very frequently, on the bus to school, when she was a schoolgirl, when those crowded
[Guest]: buses she was getting groped by much older men.
[Guest]: So this is absolutely a real phenomenon, and in many ways, it'll be underreported.
[Guest]: You know, most victims of sexual assault do not tell anyone.
[Guest]: So sexual crimes are absolutely going to be underreported.
[Guest]: And so I'm not saying they're overreported.
[Guest]: My point is that there's this daily deluge.
[Guest]: Now the question is, what, if we want to challenge impunity for male violence, what's the most
[Guest]: effective way of doing that?
[Guest]: Now you're totally right, that outrage around the 2012, 2012 attacks did lead to changes
[Guest]: in legislation, but it's not like fear of crime has radically reduced.
[Guest]: So the legislation was changed, yes, but given relatively weak state capacity and enforcement,
[Guest]: that hasn't actually made people perceive the streets as any safer, at least that's
[Guest]: not my impression.
[Guest]: And so I would be careful of celebrating that victory in itself.
[Guest]: What I think is much more important is sustained feminist activism.
[Guest]: So feminist activism is important, but not in itself, because some of the women I interview
[Guest]: and also the men, they say, yes, we protested, but then nothing happened.
[Guest]: Delhi is still very unsafe.
[Guest]: And that itself can be dangerous because then people can become trapped in this despondency
[Guest]: trap.
[Guest]: That what's the, you know, to change the world, you need to have a sense of collective self-efficacy
[Guest]: that if you invest in mobilisation, if you continually march and mobilise, then the state
[Guest]: will respond and enact better enforcement, better policing.
[Guest]: And for some, they don't think that's happened and they can even become disheartened.
[Guest]: So the question is what can cultivate relentless mobilisation?
[Guest]: And there, I would actually say what's really important is that seeing that mobilisation
[Guest]: results in better law enforcement and actually ends impunity for male violence.
[Guest]: And Gabby Crooks Wisner has done great work on this in Rajasthan.
[Guest]: So, for example, she shows that people in rural Rajasthan are much more likely to mobilise
[Guest]: for public goods when they see and believe that the state will respond to their petitions.
[Guest]: And the same is true for domestic, for violence.
[Guest]: So I think it's that you can create a greater, a stronger positive feedback loop, but showing
[Guest]: that feminist activism leads to greater government responsiveness, because then that can in itself
[Guest]: encourage more feminist activism.
[Guest]: So I think it's showing that activism works and results in impunity for male violence.
[Guest]: I think sending the message, it's incredibly important for organisations to publicise zero
[Guest]: tolerance because perpetrators will continue if they think they can get away with it.
[Guest]: And victims or survivors will be less likely to report if they think nothing will happen.
[Guest]: If they think that by far, by, you know, many, very few victims tell anyone, let alone the
[Guest]: police.
[Guest]: Many, and there's a wonderful book by Pulumi Roy Chowdhury called Capable Women, Incapable
[Guest]: States.
[Guest]: And she talks about, you know, women may be fearful of going to the police or don't anticipate
[Guest]: any favours at all from going to the police.
[Guest]: They, you know, the police may be reluctant, they may not even file the FRI.
[Guest]: So it's really about building state capacity and feminist activism, the two need to work
[Guest]: together to change, to build this ideology that people can end impunity for male violence.
[Amit Varma]: I think feminist activism is a solution to a different problem, the problem of the rule
[Amit Varma]: of law.
[Amit Varma]: And I agree that the post Nirbhaya laws haven't really made the streets of Delhi safer.
[Amit Varma]: But that's an issue, as you put it, of the rule of law and of state capacity, and the
[Amit Varma]: solutions are deeply complicated and activism, feminist or otherwise, doesn't seem likely
[Amit Varma]: to change that.
[Amit Varma]: It's a deep structural problem.
[Amit Varma]: But what I would be wary of is shooting the messenger, I think, if the state of crime
[Amit Varma]: against women is bad, it's got to be reported as bad, you know, there's sort of no way around
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: So all these to me are in different domains.
[Amit Varma]: The journalists are doing what they must, the rule of law is utterly broken.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I've just come back from a conference where a bunch of us, where a bunch of people
[Amit Varma]: rather spoke or spoke, I mean, it almost seems like an unfixable problem on some margins.
[Amit Varma]: Mayor activism isn't going to solve this particular issue.
[Amit Varma]: But mayor, but activism, feminist activism, especially can make a huge dent when it comes
[Amit Varma]: to the mindsets of people.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I think some social change has to come from within society.
[Amit Varma]: And then the state has its own function.
[Amit Varma]: Now, we happen to have a dysfunctional state, and it is the way it is, and that's a much
[Amit Varma]: deeper problem.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I think, I do not know, and I'll be open and honest about this, I do not
[Guest]: know what would make Delhi safer.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: But I, I remain sceptical.
[Guest]: And I want to say that I don't know if just repeating that sexual assaults happen, necessarily
[Guest]: cultivates activism in a context of relatively low rates of female employment, where women
[Guest]: might not be gathering together, because instead, you might just be cultivating hopelessness,
[Guest]: learned hopelessness, that all these bad things are happening, and nothing's changing and
[Guest]: nothing we can do about them.
[Guest]: So I don't know the solution.
[Guest]: I'm not saying the media shouldn't report.
[Guest]: All I'm saying is this deluge, the reality of violence may just, you know, if it's on
[Guest]: the forefront, if a father is coming to breakfast, and he's reading the newspaper, and he reads
[Guest]: about the gang rape, and then his daughter asks if she can have a sleepover at a friend's
[Guest]: house, he may say no.
[Guest]: Now, so that's the only thing I'm trying to highlight.
[Guest]: I don't have any, I don't have the solution.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: You know, so I don't know what would be the better way of doing everything.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I don't think a journalist's job is to make society feel this way or that
[Amit Varma]: way.
[Amit Varma]: A journalist's job is just to report the news as a journalist sees it.
[Amit Varma]: So the fact of the matter is Delhi is an unsafe place for women.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it is what it is.
[Amit Varma]: So but I think we're both in agreement about that.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a deeply sort of complicated problem.
[Amit Varma]: Great.
[Amit Varma]: So you've kind of given me so much of your time, and I'm deeply grateful for that.
[Amit Varma]: And I will, of course, be listening to the episode for once at half speed so I can kind
[Amit Varma]: of absorb all the useful lessons you've shared with me and all my listeners.
[Amit Varma]: Some closing questions, one, in the course of all the work that you've done, and this
[Amit Varma]: is particularly a relevant question, because you came into this work questioning your priors,
[Amit Varma]: happy to rock your priors, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: So in the course of all your work, what is the biggest thing that you learned that really
[Unknown]: surprised you?
[Unknown]: I think the importance of culture, the importance of ideology and how that shapes what we do.
[Guest]: And I underestimated that, I underestimated the importance of religion.
[Guest]: And as I've written about before, you know, me coming in with my sort of atheist, secular,
[Guest]: empiricist mindset, I didn't appreciate how much people might be fearful of eternal damnation,
[Guest]: how much people might buy into certain ideologies, and how that might shape and how those beliefs
[Guest]: and desires shape how they respond to economic opportunities.
[Guest]: And that's really key to the great gender divergence.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so I understand why religion can be a negative force in terms of codifying social
[Amit Varma]: norms that keep women back.
[Amit Varma]: But fear of eternal damnation, I'm not so sure.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the economist Stephen Landsberg had a great book called Big Questions.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the questions in that, which was quite provocative, but which I think and you
[Amit Varma]: know, fans of Landsberg will forgive me if I don't articulate it properly, because I
[Amit Varma]: don't remember the exact sort of terms in which he put it.
[Amit Varma]: But his point was no one believes in God, that people say they believe in God, but when
[Amit Varma]: push comes to shove, their revealed preferences will show that they don't really believe in
[Amit Varma]: God.
[Amit Varma]: So my belief in that sense from what I see, and I'm of course an atheist, but from what
[Amit Varma]: I see of religious people around me, is that they don't really believe either, that they
[Amit Varma]: might follow certain customs and social mores and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, ultimately, if they are in an incredibly sort of drastic spot, they won't
[Amit Varma]: be praying to God, they'll be going to a doctor or trying to figure out another way to solve
[Amit Varma]: whatever other problem they have.
[Amit Varma]: And they have blind faith in other domains.
[Amit Varma]: For example, some people believe in homeopathy and try to cure themselves with it, which
[Amit Varma]: is a different kind of blind faith and a different kind of false God.
[Amit Varma]: But the toxic thing that religion does is it codifies many of these backward values.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a problem.
[Amit Varma]: And that's why it's a danger.
[Amit Varma]: But does fear of eternal damnation really come into it?
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: Yeah, I believe that it does.
[Guest]: So there's a nice book called Honour and Shame in Iraq.
[Guest]: And it's about how women might acquiesce to their husband's demands, and try to please
[Guest]: them and do everything, you know, even if their husbands are incredibly abusive, even
[Guest]: if their husbands are violent, even if they force sex or rape their wives, you know, many
[Guest]: of these women genuinely believe, according to this excellent ethnography, that, you know,
[Guest]: if they don't have sex with their husbands, then they will be punished by angels that,
[Guest]: you know, they will have.
[Guest]: And they're even in Christianity, also in early Christianity, there were these tours
[Guest]: of hell where people talked about the torment, the way that sinners would be tormented in
[Guest]: the afterlife.
[Guest]: So I think, and if you look at data, there's a great variety, there's, I mean, there's
[Guest]: far stronger belief in eternal damnation in Egypt, for example, people are more likely
[Guest]: to believe in hell, actually, than God, there's much stronger belief in hell.
[Guest]: The belief that if you do wrong, then that will affect what happens to you in the afterlife,
[Guest]: I think is quite powerful.
[Guest]: And that's one of the, and I think, so one, I think is the fear of hell, that you're doing
[Guest]: something terrible, and there will be condemnation.
[Guest]: And we see that across the world, not just in Europe, not just in Southern Mesopotamia,
[Guest]: also in Chinese literature, how disobedient women were upset in cosmic harmony, and then
[Guest]: they were challenged and chastised.
[Guest]: And then we have also see the element of social policing, right?
[Guest]: So the social policing, the institutions are important.
[Guest]: The other way in which I think religion can be a major blockage and bottleneck to critical
[Guest]: debate if people, because religion can be elevated to a specific plane that people want
[Guest]: to be a good person, they want to be the good and dutiful person, especially the ideologies
[Guest]: of shame and stigma around female chastity and virginity.
[Guest]: The idea that these are the pure, these are the ideals that which we must strive for.
[Guest]: I think ethnographies do point to that being incredibly important and incredibly powerful
[Guest]: for us.
[Guest]: I stay, I strive strongly on, and I would say, let me caveat it, it's not just religion
[Guest]: per se, but it's this male dominated religions that have been incredibly patriarchal.
[Amit Varma]: I would imagine that women who are in that situation and who do whatever their husband
[Amit Varma]: wants to do it because they feel they just don't have a choice, they're just trapped
[Amit Varma]: in a terrible situation.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, I mean, and that could be one way of rationalising it.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, I do have a bit of a rational bias.
[Amit Varma]: So maybe I am wrong here.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe people do fear literal eternal damnation, who is to say.
[Amit Varma]: My next closing question is, what broad consensus narrative do you disagree with or is wrong?
[Amit Varma]: Like, what broad conventional belief is there, which you feel is wrong?
[Guest]: Okay, how controversial do I want to be on your podcast?
[Amit Varma]: I just want you to be honest.
[Amit Varma]: Don't worry.
[Unknown]: The, you know, the toxic internet trolls haven't gotten so far.
[Amit Varma]: Will you protect me from the trolls?
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Though you don't need protection, but I will protect you.
[Amit Varma]: You promise you'll protect me on this one?
[Amit Varma]: You don't need protection.
[Amit Varma]: I want you to say you'll protect me.
[Amit Varma]: How can I protect you from the trolls?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I can take your phone away.
[Unknown]: Sure.
[Guest]: Okay, listen.
[Guest]: So I have argued that the major drivers of gender equality are job creating growth and
[Guest]: feminist activism.
[Guest]: Some people push for an alternative and we see social policing of discourse, that it
[Guest]: matters what we say, like how we refer to each other people.
[Guest]: So this might be referred to in pejorative terms as woke.
[Guest]: So using the right inclusive terminology, and I think the importance of discourse there
[Guest]: is overrated.
[Guest]: And we actually don't have strong empirical evidence to say that if people use slightly
[Guest]: different terminology, then we would see greater gender equality.
[Guest]: So that I think would be, and I think it's mainly that we see that we see that in.
[Guest]: So we see a lot of self righteous social policing in the USA, for example.
[Guest]: These people absolutely committed to equality.
[Guest]: They believe, many of them believe the best way to do that is by changing discourse, etc.
[Guest]: And I don't think that's empirically supported.
[Guest]: So I think that would be the major way in which I, yeah, disagree with something that's
[Guest]: quite popular in that environment.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: And I think I agree with you.
[Amit Varma]: So my last question.
[Unknown]: Will you protect me if people attack me on that point?
[Amit Varma]: Why do you need protection?
[Amit Varma]: This is such a non feminist thing to say.
[Unknown]: Come on.
[Unknown]: Right, I'm asking for the Rakhi thread, right, right, right.
[Amit Varma]: Rakhi, you should be promising to protect me if I get into trouble because of what you
[Amit Varma]: said.
[Amit Varma]: Like, come on.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't expect this from you, it's very sad, very sad.
[Amit Varma]: So all right.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, so final question, and you probably would expect this by now.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, one of the things that sort of awes me when I read your work, and something
[Amit Varma]: that I deeply love, is how many rabbit holes you provide to all of us to go down on in
[Amit Varma]: terms of all the links, all the books, every day you're on Twitter posting about three
[Amit Varma]: or four or eight or nine different books, depending on what the day is.
[Amit Varma]: And that's fantastic, because I've picked up a whole bunch of books just reading about
[Amit Varma]: it on your Twitter thread, and it's been an education.
[Amit Varma]: So what are the books that have meant the most to you?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I asked this question about films, music, so if you want to talk about
[Amit Varma]: that as well, but what would you take with you to a desert island?
[Amit Varma]: What is, you know, really, really dear to you, and it doesn't even have to be something
[Amit Varma]: to do with your work or your research or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But whatever means the most to you and that you absolutely love.
[Unknown]: I would take to a desert island would be a motorboat.
[Unknown]: What?
[Amit Varma]: I asked you to recommend books for my readers.
[Amit Varma]: And you've just said what I will take to a desert island will be a motorboat.
[Unknown]: What is this?
[Unknown]: I don't want to be trapped on a desert island where I'll die.
[Unknown]: So I can escape.
[Unknown]: A fully fuelled motorboat, I don't want to be trapped on your desert island.
[Unknown]: I'm gonna die.
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to die.
[Amit Varma]: And then Component, what's the last good book you read?
[Amit Varma]: Fine.
[Guest]: Give us something.
[Guest]: Throw us a straw.
[Guest]: The last excellent book I read, I really liked Shrayana's book, Desperately Seeking Shahrukh.
[Guest]: I think it's fantastic.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I think that adds another element that we haven't really discussed is about love and
[Guest]: how women's desire for love, and especially from one person, especially in places where
[Guest]: monogamous marriage is highly valorised, as we discussed earlier, can trap them in abusive
[Guest]: relationships because they're constantly trying to please that person and cultivate their
[Guest]: favours.
[Guest]: And this goes back to our earlier conversation.
[Guest]: If the desire for love and the desire to be loved is the primary thing and there are fewer
[Guest]: alternative ways in which women can flourish and be rewarded and respected, then they can
[Guest]: be trapped in very abusive relationships.
[Guest]: So love has the potential to trap women in patriarchal relationships.
[Guest]: And I think Shrayana's book is so fantastic because it explores Indian gender relations
[Guest]: through another lens, and it's saying, you know, all these women navigating elements
[Guest]: of patriarchy, they see in Shahrukh Khan this idea of this gentle, nurturing, appreciating,
[Guest]: affectionate, care, compassion, listening to women.
[Guest]: And I think that's such an amazing way of understanding gender relations, then that
[Guest]: that's what people might aspire for, but not getting.
[Guest]: And I think that's a fantastic way of understanding gender relations, distinguishing between our
[Guest]: internalised ideologies, our norm perceptions.
[Guest]: And the idea is that many women would like to be appreciated.
[Guest]: They would like all their care labour.
[Guest]: So there's an interesting excerpt in that book where they talk about, in one of Shahrukh's
[Guest]: films, where he sings in appreciation of the tiffin.
[Guest]: He sings in appreciation of his wife's care work, and that so often across the world,
[Guest]: and this is not unique to India, women's care work is neglected and devalued.
[Guest]: And here he appreciates her labour.
[Guest]: And one woman talks about how nice and how wonderful that might be, just to be appreciated.
[Guest]: And so, yeah, I would, I'd really recommend Shrayana's book.
[Guest]: It's really wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And she's, my most downloaded episode, in fact, is with Shrayana, it's called The Loneliness
[Amit Varma]: of the Indian Women.
[Amit Varma]: We'll link it from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And since you mentioned the element of love, sort of a final, final question for you, which
[Amit Varma]: is, while what you're studying is really social norms, social currents, so on and so forth,
[Amit Varma]: and on the surface, it can seem dry.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you've spent a lot of time talking to people, living with people,
[Amit Varma]: being a witness to their experiences, being a confidant for, you know, whatever is happening
[Amit Varma]: in their lives.
[Amit Varma]: And you've had sort of a unique glimpse of their interior lives as well, and sort of
[Amit Varma]: their lives as people.
[Amit Varma]: And at some level, does it also make a part of your research, not just the intellectual
[Amit Varma]: work that you put into it, but also a certain emotional work?
[Amit Varma]: You know, how do you sort of then kind of navigate that?
[Amit Varma]: Because you go in with these people as your subjects, in a sense, and they've been kind
[Amit Varma]: enough to offer you the friendship.
[Amit Varma]: But as you come out, it's obviously more than that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that aspect of things, that human aspect of connecting.
[Unknown]: Yeah, that's such a great question, because in the process of getting to know people,
[Guest]: in the process of understanding their stories, their aspirations, their struggles, we do
[Guest]: form these wonderful friendships.
[Guest]: You know, maybe this will sound insincere and fake, but I really do connect.
[Guest]: You know, I have such strong emotional ties, really great bonds of friendship with so many
[Guest]: people who've looked after me, who've welcomed me into their homes.
[Guest]: And I stay in touch with so many of them, whether it's through WhatsApp or Instagram.
[Guest]: You know, the Bemba mother who I stayed with, she often chats with me on Facebook or Instagram
[Guest]: in Bemba, of course, whereas Moroccan women follow me on Instagram.
[Guest]: And it's fun because on Instagram, they can see me traveling through each different country.
[Guest]: So the Moroccan men and women see that I go to Italy and interview people there, etc.
[Guest]: So they get to follow my travels, and that's a really nice way that I'm able to stay in
[Guest]: touch with these people that are incredibly dear to my heart, really and truly.
[Guest]: I have, you know, friendships all over the world that are incredibly important to me.
[Guest]: And I just really, I'm so grateful for learning about their lives, understanding each individual
[Guest]: struggle, their story, their perspectives, their individuality, and that goes back to
[Guest]: your question on depth and breadth.
[Guest]: And I think that, yeah, I really appreciate it.
[Guest]: I really, really enjoy what I do.
[Amit Varma]: That's I think, a wonderful note to end on, because even if the world doesn't change,
[Amit Varma]: you'll always have that.
[Amit Varma]: So thank you so much for your time today.
[Guest]: This is great.
[Guest]: Honestly, I have been listening to you for forever.
[Guest]: And I've always been a fan.
[Guest]: And this is the greatest honor and privilege.
[Unknown]: I'm very, very happy to be here.
[Amit Varma]: And thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, hop on over to the show notes, enter rabbit
[Amit Varma]: holes at will.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Alice on Twitter at underscore Alice underscore Evans.
[Amit Varma]: This will also be linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Seen and The Unseen?
[Amit Varma]: If so, would you like to support the production of the show?
[Amit Varma]: You can go over to seenunseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep
[Amit Varma]: this podcast alive and kicking.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.